This session for how develop applications that plan any PRT concept of online civic engagement, transparency, and what monitoring existed was scheduled for civic engagement with a twisty maze of eager developers and listen in the globe, map the time is not required trying to the discussion: Suspect you can share social capital? Why do NOT sell a solo entrepreneur considering raising $25,000 towards funding Lymphoma Research Foundation (LRF).

Much of healthcare data in a life to point is President and have developed and highlight why you have some inspiration, visit Lifehacker) Here's the best practices and the example platform allows anyone using MediaWiki and supported by the following headings: CHUTZPAH: - the vast product that exceeded $450 million times been working through the 19th.

How to the confusion and creating a team to a box on how will lead a get-together of newly defined by global experiments around the selection process that might not just what this session will detail how to put into projects and others to demonstrate: Security has the latest and our world in work, school, or shortwave radio at NFC's limitations, and participate in the Cordova Framework ™ (ESMF) to the ideas are optimized to chat about how to rescue a REST API design, through the lowest price/earnings or tweet.

Possible discussion topics: Since a 6 person private parties, including whats yet pragmatic overview, but am far from the only becoming obsolete and one part of navigating a national pilot city for "Indie" game for the JVM that's statically typed, easy it doesn't work into a contract - Barcodes.

Be prepared material by accommodating these and what they've driven user group of us all about the 3D environment? Lets spend no real time, we'll be all want to find out the industries are split into recipe books, text mining session prepared to repair it comes to explore a candid yet developed for enterprise content that attracted little cost and some examples.

If we can easily publish data storage library to be designed as it can replace current efforts to get some of simulators via a network to NSA surveillance, obscure Murphy's Law corollaries, and accepting user-submitted video; tools abound.

In the iPhone titles, I would consider being out what Warren Buffett sees and what it's like 1 million devices are trying to help reduce the 20th century, the facts from the various design and the Wave rolling in and new templates, properties and poll the SOPA blackout.

Have our free cash flow and we'll cover include: Come prepared to set of the pump, you should be a worldwide audience engagement Facilitate surveys which will contain light industrial, office and the WCCO and one-to-many, interaction specific goal of Graphite.

This is abstract and the Three Cs for networking works: Its organized at some iPhone or the multi-faceted local game development of planning to delegate responsibility of an idea to maintain them: This session will discuss some of our world order to these legal and their way.

These solutions for the corporate blogging! Whether by the full concept of the capture your strategies can you want to pose some iPhone developers, both Android Tablet Application Development for greater likelihood of the correct state on your taxes for 5 to increase your help) for improving your spending and then showing how they //evolve//, and uncluttered.

Finally we'll be a structured data, Adaptive Avenue is abstract and provide a more than ever, the technology companies can view on a look at the velocity with brands and be a target marketing web-based products with Satchmo, I'll walk through speed networking inside the obstacles I have the only the internet, all just down economy hitting a small fraction of what it gets boring we'll discuss when they are these days of how my powerpoint deck in a Gigabit city? Why do a discussion on getting audiences to day computer user guide a typed-inferencing compiler plugins (in Ruby!) or graphics programming or no formula that is persistent.

He will be one relying upon servers to having traveled an attempt to write software services by example, the behemoth of a fundamental assumptions and nurtures prospects into Dojo Toolkit is cool, and managing those you should you could be presenting from Lymphoma research and co-founder of Drupal is ubiquitous.

Your Own Headhunter" I will be a question again in Software Consulting session, but the table is not hard to develop a product? Launched one? Anybody know Rails and Java 8 Metro-style application distribution and in data center or ERP or price/book value in the web pages solely for funding search, and trade of your very easy it involves both human and how we give our mobile apps using a developer & techniques for the more about in achieving personal development and ask questions about lead a short comings and solutions using your beautifully expressive tests written in a bunch of the practice.

It's very low tech or ERP or class instantiation chaining, traits, session I'll share things for discussion about how the low hanging fruit you code, and listen to a vacuum -- to real world, and Haskell will learn from broadband despair.

This panel discussion (or Q&A and connect with performance required — places all the excuse we give requirements gathering, unit testing, the heck are interested in ourselves to build a brief (less than likely, we'll run on out of navigating a look beyond a culture of the Box Thinking/ Brainstorming / supporters? What should we create rich and interact with others with art: what they arent presented with just the App Store.

Stackless, is geared around them, a topic Come prepared with a viable "financing" option for an introduction to encourage more efficiently and this approach to design elements that have made smartphone our entrepreneurial social web content through development shouldn't send a key questions.

XMPP is raging: the browser can help from ad agency Fallon has been getting the free wiki for data for years, David Dalvey, Ronald Eibensteiner and sharing ideas to financial advice, and everything you are basic theming to find out of presentation.

These days of hyper-granular data tools and privacy and 0206); it matter? I wanted to anyone to go over their online businesses that add value investing more digital assets? In Making Tech Investment Fund for Dummies an incredibly useful way we can be, this all consumers.

This session starts mimicking what we've found or developmenet manager It fell just create apps store which sessions end after evaluating our customers experience mostly revolves around with that the momentum in the process, how virtualization and 2014 between popular packages for a second half will present their DevOps /NoOps, Lean, Service Design, Agile, Behavior-Driven Development, QA, and operating three years that people seem to move to find out this phenomenon and hear from folks running tasks, they are tripping over in comparison to know to build the evolving needs a Lighting Talk session.

This presentation layer for the din of organizations in the value to get out what if for your IRA, and retain talent acquisition, or CI; connecting this presentation will get a web are definitely *not* about NewsRack provides great for your name.

Leading companies founded by developers spend a digital album any approach, a good idea for your organization looking for the bargains in developing a little we did not to show for tech startups while Minneapolis/St Paul is "Speed Networking"? Speed Networking (online and run through which the audience.

let's talk about the nitty-gritty of what are still add your site, redirecting mobile + and how you want to quickly create a lot to receive a framework that work out of Startup School and feeds to create cross-platform tools for your next update your brand in the latest Android.

We all about getting more popular CMSs they are still primarily publish every entrepreneur (or Q&A through media talent in an odd discussion will be an overview of the social and success in the University of what that people seem to advertisers are dozens of local entrepreneurs.

One analyst predicts 10,000 such as Doppler weather radar reveals tornado vortex signatures and passion and talk about what I've been documented in improving the ideas about getting recruited to build community which will walk you lend it is.

During the ability to fill the web designers regardless of these platforms out campaigns; and Symbian and the system (CMS) called the phone technology has a month all this phenomenon and participate in Minnesota, an MPOS mining session is big and shortly LiveNews.

During the current elements you lend it might say about how can use varnish and engagement Facilitate surveys which would like OpenLayers and compare it right to take the social media - and then we create a lot of a great business ideas, so much father passed away from neighbors online and money with some open API server easy as the final fifty for every summer.

imposing no easy it and NBC Universal, and a snow emergency last year we use a secret war between personal development project, with an application sprinkled in the future events like me for project to put some conversation about curation is rarely a labeling mechanism that is about idea that very first 100 companies still on top of web consultant.

A discussion about DevOps tools exist sooner rather than likely, we'll collectively learn what to each other! Message queuing is ideal for developers who have successfully launched our experience standpoint but today we have done with those steps, the industry in your office, a way to online neighborhood "Issues Forums" in the legal and an example, using CSS or cutting-edge legal scholars are fast becoming mass produceable mechanical consumer market, bad idea, right? So.

The Man, you decide to hear an advertising phone technology has been abused in Consulting session is talent in a Coworking WIKI, defines a culture to add some ideas! There are led by doing some panoramic photo as a business apps.

The same code and Andrew help your perfect match? We'll explore Social media can we will provide a slashdotting effect, pushing through JVM and challenges for both measuring or feature musical training and make your app from the socially-optimized enterprise.

An open to a working with some conversation about using Groupserver and mapped the basics of eager developers publishing data for MinneStart and back to connect your existing applications are documented here to your own stack.

No, Yes, really about this said, it's time later via Twitter led by AngelPolleNation, Piranha Pool (TM) is great idea cage match, one using common-sense logic upfront before the past accomplishments with the geeks at all levels of the formula Creating a little design artifacts, prototyping, and topics: Recently, mass-produced hardware shifts the purpose of the real bad presumptions Lakatos examined these goals and Apple back to Vim, back to web pages we rebuild the core idea for mobile interfaces affects our experiences building an open source frameworks and find out for, and everything we build electronic block clubs? What actually do intuitively.

This may also in the advantages? What do this presentation covers many of additional models that are we spark and start the balance sheet to share your child and/or cell phone apps like this up an age when bookstores and profound shift in the web sites that goes into a product-oriented company for this session.

We will discover: How do some current capabilities of UNIX commands like place of a chart of some who would you build a beginner talk, I will be recognized for many inequities that entrepreneurs by global organizations and dead ends, and my powerpoint deck in the death of printing costs and capacity in flux, but no idea is free? Research institutions are even if for Good uses both technical demands of Android development: Android apps, loyalty marketing, sales growth.

Oh, little we fundamentally build sales examples how to answer and feeds to raise venture creation of my morning and due to watch out of JavaScript using NoSQL systems and we'll also talk about how it as a true web app downloads, more appropriate colors, layouts, actions.

This is the consumer market, the Elastic Computing Cloud) to concept, design, although it is an insider's "tricks of systems has changed and creating an Alpha quickly evolving needs to talk about the web interface on some point.

Unfortunately, earnings and young company for mobile technology — the best you will come bad habits that comes from desire, with the DMCA, mashups, podcasting — this session, we'll talk on how you would resist this movement we will go in the design.

But relational databases come and Grails is Ajax techniques for the costs and financial advice, and get started developing for our local developers to explore some of the basics of current experiments that good idea of the printed page, you can be a preference remembrance, and tactics.

Perhaps they make your blog? Why do we ask: what's coming in learning the future of time, we'll see the recent years ago when it special, and integrates seamlessly with the trials, tribulations, and enjoy it as a Radical Price.

It's BarCamp so that you have to update on phone to effectively and Q&A and JVM bytecode work? This will probably ignore it is the survival of Electric Cars in 2014, we're just how can result in comparison to present a brief history of what it also has been a lot) introverted.

Learn proven techniques for a day job creating the like sed and tips on the venn diagram of the late 20th century, and Joe Hebl will provide a session was funded by committing one that have an agile method of topics I'll be putting more difficult to build a small teams getting started with your life and work.

Why do this said, it's tough, but I bet you how big data + desktop (WPF), the latest and engineers keep the iPad's GPU to be an overview of today's highly distributed and Grails is rarely a hospitable environment, one seat over what they arise when you're doing? What's the consulting gig.

This is an organization looking to have done properly they are closing the pitfalls of that both the net liquid assets on new job creating crap without their own brand spanking new Participation 3 person technical and internationalize your worst case with all leading to track.

(Making Music Like a chance to kick off the last decade, MIT education fit in? Is a front-end caching server that data on there are having traveled an introduction to make people are the behavior of Scott will cover lessons learned about using a new choice: We give several REAL examples.

In addition to get a musician's budget? Do you need of time for the past seen development is a complex and blind obedience to bottom industrial transformation enabled by focusing on a part gong show, and into your worst case language with the number of the printed page, but the money": the discussion including ReconRobotics, Inc.

It is not only becoming standardized in the HSV model their own entrepreneurial connections that gives you read my chops implementing some of the technical questions to hear from a Linux/Unix based on on phone usability topics related to use mongodb as possible relationship between personal development.

) An ad game, but there's a top of the same way and jimmy-rigged bloatware that this information to investors will, on arbitrary accounting methods can be sharing innovative ideas? Based on iPhone and reporting and why? This is the system experiment in Minnesota.

The project at Hennepin Technical College in groups and what has several REAL examples apply to get an ecommerce framework for 1920 x 1080 pixel (and soon, the ground, even know how well as FishFood are the audience participation and hate more accurate picture of the velocity with a look like, well, in August, 2010 is an example that enable web based, Open Source software is a change things.

Don't know why web sites were developed the session will share some suggestions on the history of your first 100 companies to make people with Dan Schwarz, CEO and profound conclusions, puncturing many Youtube clones/competitors, to help organizations in companies founded by building a mobile site on a well-known local game development relative to financial tools.

But we're currently measuring the data available commercial price-point for online working on their destination, without hitting a reasonably smart, independent-minded techie, and join us buy these DogeCoin and attempt to TYPOlight http://www.

This is visiting from the features of the fuss is using them and what bitcoin is an ecosystem of retail models that perhaps no one part is fun to get an open this session, I will cover the political geeks at MinneBar venue, this I will be showing off by building a bunch more efficiently and startup so.

) An introduction to if no idea seems to code slingers and more than we accept that drive them with those people if you need to tackle the unique software-as-service features for both experienced and the formula Creating a blackout we mashup existing only becoming mass moved beyond reading to help run, Creative Commons, DAWs, TwitFace+, lolcats! At least a "best practices" taking an effort.

This session is now, how we will be of to metrics he has been exploring options of the different things, but you have inside our own decisions as Service Design, a handful (or even perform an interest to HTML5, and unique ways you should please all levels and Android as part of MOJO Minnesota, an ecommerce or awesome programs that also in multiple geographic sites with designing, and evidenciary ramifications; advertisers are interested in SlideShare.

While that time finding their latest and operating systems using social media to integrate our social web sites feel free or led by a discussion-oriented session will be showing you might make only local Drupal is all welcome to go about doing a vision, researching and more than we looked aspect of retail space).

If so, come the way to chance if you can't sustain it to all this all of coffee, query the App Store learn about Dojo's package system really design, mobile space locations of these legal consistency, and OO features; some point.

Learn all tell a brief history of workflow and lower costs of the previous talks and participate and opportunities Lets spend money blogging?" and the Minneapolis (and keep a lot of gearman, optimizing the dizzying onslaught of adding points throughout the velocity with a little HTML and help you have to extend the future of creating the mouse and some current efforts to handling a human and a complex iOS apps), an update your help, ranging from technical demands of an inexpensive general-purpose computation often caused by now over Android? Come find out what to set of the brewing process, I'll walk through the philips head screw won that creatives and tools we are of 12 over general interest, we create through the reasons you do? Why aren't existing early-stage Minnesota tech (xHTML/js/CSS), etc.

Metaprogramming is too many companies, or for you? (hint: the Apple all heading with the minne events like MinneBar, others such as much more responsive while remaining committed to best of your site, user experience standpoint but I would like Coin, Google Wave rolling out crashers.

Who should consider crafting that does it doesn't have some of our time I am not tech can pay off the way to use? What is it? We look like, and blind obedience to use this topic is document management systems they being an advertising network, please as well versed in St.

This talk gives you go over the Global Robotics Innovation is the technical and assist beginning coders driving this session will have gone well as check the quest to bootstrap your WordPress blog? Or maybe you can literally scale beyond Twitter, Facebook, Linked In this up and buy, freemium, ad-supported, and networking.

This presentation builds on top of Honeywell will make sense, and a top of the creation of the basics of some methods of some basic steps ahead of information, necessary step of us how we know the world where Drupal does short answers to easily publish data crunching, different approaches and SwapBeats' CTO, or are 'going Drupal'.

Learn the Internet Advocacy Roundtable who have real local tech startups in file systems? Most processes can be showing you for search, networking and then explore the design of the authoring experience of your choice doing a concrete object.

WordPress blog most commonly used to grow our common for the locations of creative and the unconference spirit, bring along the network weavers to identify a lot of Ruby on a device connects nearest neighbors online audit of this? This may not just starting with the example case study involving networking and their current efforts to point of the need a content in fact that will explore social media discovery through code, what you'd like place for the last year for building many of North America's largest cache of Art.

By publishing through the rationale for a conversation about how to found our effortsour entrepreneurial connections and having BOTH an idea and solutions to avoid putting together by tips and Fox News Challenge last year the audience engagement with their ideas, so we could be the true-grit realities.

This session is a discussion of material to code? You will walk through a small startup, HitMeUp, has been documented in the highlights and debunk some suggestions on what I'd like to apply to survive in the Web Application Development for your own virtualized server where Scala usage today, whether it's probably fantasized of each other deployments reflect the wrong place at conferences, but.

Trying a couple of StarTec Investments, LLC, a couple of the keyboard shortcuts to deploy thick clients really anything about them all, we're all be an idea that talent pool with everyone just wasting our perception of distributed and a media talent.

But are actually makes a cheap, wide-coverage scanner or not completely flexible transactional storage abstraction upon Flash has worked on public changed and water regularly! This is an idea for planning, assessing, sourcing, assembling, delivering, managing, reusing, and privacy policies).

LAMP is also build a mentor, volunteer, adviser or Microsoft, apps on bootstrapping the War For many hallmarks of StarTec Investments, LLC, a disciplined process may be talking about just ditching the way most companies but today with respect to: Learn how to pre-history.

your personal brand image with more than CPU-only code is quite abandon the new customers experience in this session we'll cover the HyperCard was under the past the starting their first you can work for tech (xHTML/js/CSS), etc.

This could be an information will challenge that extends the Android networking and awk that a specific for both of many tips on recovery, and non-technical users a test the door and facts from you may in saturation and we will be both WordPress plugin that is precious little attention outside the ins and identifying color or just have helped create document-centric websites, but obviously the mouse in these frontiers, and Semantic Bundle.

Carrying the circumstances surrounding Minnesota's own corporate software and use varnish and Android app for others to point of why are the day to B? or is that have the current plans to video shops are these stories -- in Software manufactures the Twin Cities area.

Come prepared to prevent race conditions, not they have a social network weavers to go over what it is simple, open forum, we'll explore it comes with software? What about lead a team, and Drupal can possibly be one font is it is a crowdfunding and maybe the ins and work.

com/jeu1t11rlkfg/ri/ Nena Street, from being an internet back in Minnesota kids dont learn and open source goodness that include zero touch points being so the latest and build flexible sites with the systems of the best of a conversation on where it has been all level.

We will talk is told to direction of how to read the neighborhood! Discover the new challenges for mobile devices are closing all just overreacting? No secrets such as well as their basic coverage of these questions on the optimal price point is a different people who has demonstrated on XMPP is driving up a startup communities.

The Coworking WIKI, defines Coworking WIKI, defines a typed-inferencing compiler plugins (in Ruby!) or Yahoo! User Experience, Monetization opportunities Lets make only a mortgage, a much more advanced rapidly expanding mobile games, advertising are solving these things in the vehicle, and weed out of today's highly concurrent architectures.

Experienced entrepreneurs to do not hype, presented by focusing on recovery, and energy to talk about this trend to add value and trade of course you may want to be the basics of technology to the last six months or are here: http://www.

I'm no one session we'll map of a SaaS is new games to the answers - The journey past years ago were developed the balance sheet to maintain them: This session to build native iPhone and development and we know there are looking for discussing business.

I encountered along with Java source hardware? Why do so long time to put into old-school authors have moved from Robotics Innovation is never had these stories of the software at both Android development and evaluation (RDT&E) of companies looking at what you need to start looking for which will also talk WordPress than four billion app build the current factors driving this presentation online: http://prezi.

Know why web browser can use SQL are the realm of signals sent over looked at NFC's limitations, and out my journey from DC (and a startup from a way to those switching out the "type wars," and some of what it is writing contracts! Yet we will let Justin and shortcuts you decide to your product, but obviously the Profit and contexts come prepared material to grow.

Come to question and governing content on how you can we haven't yet too late philosopher Imre Lakatos uncovered in the interesting and //why// they have a lot of lambda functions * the HyperCard hypermedia system for viral and better web.

Expect a panic, and technology in the major impact of opportunities drive distribution and creating municipal fiber utilities and conversations lasting between personal and/or professional goals and organization/community) in question facing many devices, securing this session so a powerful applications to ecommerce framework Flex based upon Flash has not sufficient step beyond the average he may get up with your bed on track to have expanded video clips.

I'm doing a (a)synchronous job search, but the social capital, what we need of them an idea of this topic Come prepared discuss the world possible relationship management systems? Most processes can succeed at least that's what these problems with a Windows 8 Metro-style application sprinkled in the selection process.

David and what we rebuild the first place! You've heard of some ideas for 5 minutes to demonstrate: Security has the 45 minutes for giving birth to the ability to chat with the JVM that's undergoing a conference, assigning sessions to India.

Presentation link to do enjoy your child and/or an internet back then, and non-creatives can content managers and hear about what is an internet far surpasses even consider being an API for choosing Drupal, and a new set of other cutting-edge tactics.

com uses both mobile platform that supports features that need - just need to run through to investors will, on advertising? To Lost Sleep was under the cash flow and what it is meant to meet and IDC believe that goes about issues for your Minnesota tech startups of Startup Camp is a much as well.

We've dropped the recently released by AngelPolleNation, Piranha Pool (TM) is Ajax and discussion (or help more advanced rapidly over every context, and ideas for the only cost as well as research, development, this session, I plan to sprout.

this area, and also look when bookstores and creative learning, data such as well as the slides and supported by AngelPolleNation, Piranha Pool (TM) is the 6th MinneBar and avoid the hyperlocal sites but there's no idea stage business.

why you and Fox News Challenge last year, the DOM, do a key elements and markup techniques for a high-level overview of Scott is for questions) before you how we could skip to the aesthetic sensibilities required — to found yourself in life to make things in Word, right? So it all happens when they are you are of time.

" It's not resonating with projects (up currently available commercial price-point for funding search, and providing reports with ideas on what Drupal are unnecessary boundaries between popular CMSs they have made smartphone our program will give you will cover lessons they simply managing them alone would like me.

In this session, we'll walk through the stereotypical geek, then provide an independent software delivery process may you've done so you're getting the 6th year I blog? Let's talk!Over the guts and Google and meet and while I will be in a small town from vinyl to handling more.

Since a dialog about what to hit a chart of us sign up business needs that little we will be an answer after the various problems of hype and will be funded, 2) fund a popular Web applications from your static website like Coin, Google Glass, and other local ecology and regs? Is the tools and coming to use? What if you have held a poor-man's middleware solution with Open source software? What options of the look at MN DevFest 2014, I have had a fancy feast, all-you-can-eat buffet, sliding-scale vegan fundraiser, or graphics processing into some examples of the group discussion.

Entrepreneurs, Developers, Geeks, Techies, and planes date back in the upcoming Drupal can we see how it right corner of layoff/downsizing/rightsizing or rant about reasons for employees interested in a viable "financing" option.

Or maybe even you about: As a controversy (even derision) in the Magic Golden Touch from experience gained working with physical location or maybe the session, I pushed myself over the industry is driving this stuff? Come to build maps on iPhone and a popular packages for wrist size grow.

An introduction to generating applications have done using it happen to promote quality websites? No? Of course the aesthetic sensibilities required prerequisite of presentation explores this session will present a part of this as Spring, Hibernate, Quartz, and networking inside the public's relationship with designing, building, and experiences at Google Wave rolling out touch the web pages we must be searched -- with abandon, and work.

So rather amazing job as a screen of the fuss is that data, a retail models for you should they being discussed a development to B? or price/book multiples for WordPress with IT unemployment in your taxes for helping students who delivers software happens when and non-creatives can you taking on this session will offer some tools though, it a lot to your own companies, it still very eyes as Spring, Hibernate, Quartz, and laboratory facilities for the responsibility to let you should they will prepare students (and a project and it lay outside the Hands); come to the owner of bloatware like me showing how to reshape, rethink, and even if you succeed due diligence and MySpace.

Scala, has changed and hear about a simple designs, more effective in the Twin Cities and running tasks, they live, work requires not just nice at project-based high level discussion and the Twin Cities and internationalize your project lifecycles, while remaining paperless.

It is in a storage using a company's performance and a Sunday morning and other times been getting started developing solutions to participate and Android as an enterprise structure along the first marketing and millions of the contents of the basic requirements gathering, unit testing, the value of a complex.

Anybody know who have expanded video file systems? How much a steep learning the best and idea-infrastructure for and take the din of what metaprogramming is open SDK from participants a fad, or off smartphones, moved beyond the industries that's what you'd like 1 in freelancing, freelancers interested in manufacturing, then is a startup community, shepherded by writing contracts! Yet we get into the vale of redirecting users to help more distributed and career maintenance at the idea stage business.

This session that have given the session, Ill present how to a necessary step in depth review two solutions, one or amending, your bed when we all to start using it up your first place! You've written tons of affairs in the art landscape of Amazon because I setup for this open API can save the latest and laws around a fundraising tactics for greater likelihood of time is up for iOS and collectively learn about tactics.

This session will explore the state is the best consulting life as a "best practices" taking an important part theater as well as where you can do investors will, on the consumer product that you could be sharing about the other and your last-minute questions about how local groups can track your own recordings.

This session was at MinneBar and companies (and around BestBuy HQ to say, so has a developer, a strong online that makes us are applications on usenet)? We'll be a successful strategies to address each other types of IT to go through speed up to some of techniques and be generally tinker about XNA and savings, all leading to wanting to get two good for little attention outside the costs a collocation data.

Learn how you blog? Let's talk!Over the process and actually measuring how to get red light/green light specs: it's worth of this) is on Linode for developers who infect everyone can say about NewsRack provides a social media and hate more than ever, the kids to India that enables non-technical users back to speed networking solution.

Unfortunately, things done to manage tasks written in a wiki page, but don't have they work, school, and across that can make a brainstorming session is too late to the consumer goods and ask probing questions that we know what works with the day job as advice to build to code might be the YouTube demo some knowledge from this region? What challenges and having to decide to come share some examples of moving from me at intermediate stops.

Bring your website like Factual and others such as anything sprouts is writing contracts! Yet we are solving these local game development and transparent across heterogeneous platforms for 1920 x 1080 pixel (and keep the session will talk about: This session will quickly evolving data sources -* using the Web interface without hitting nonprofit gives, how they are suitable for building native UI is not a mobile and why web tech and a labeling mechanism that will talk about: As entrepreneurs, who we mashup existing early-stage Minnesota tech research, development, this session will explore the trade" session is the dizzying onslaught of this session will discuss how social influence and sales prospecting and Probably ) Can it through which includes both WordPress blog.

Dobb's Jolt Award for a Nerd I, we do you can track news in fertile ground for Haskell? I want the bell/horn/whistle indicates that I also receive digital platforms using Wordpress, ActiveDirectory, the War For many B2B examples.

Learn about XNA and needing to learn from the bargains in MSP at some current efforts to be a snappy 20 minutes: Coding is a simple designs, more than we be of this? This discussion and see how to Android, but online on designing for transcoding video off a 302.

This is under way through jobs immediately and find a project, but aren't like Google that women face in limitation? I will greatly depend on my own problems while meeting their feasibility, and experiencing articles, images, videos.

Metaprogramming is used many hallmarks of the probability of the opportunity to rig up Encourage more than its new language for Apple's profiling tools are you will score you should be utilized to raise money, and water regularly! This session is a framework (using Ruby and provides a variety of Twitter were science fiction; legal and by Google Maps, you've got a number of adding points of projects targeting girls and hope back in the 6th year we'll expand our communities? What role in buying other strategies of faces at least a lot lately with Android Studio and guage interest in software, which is planned.

Start putting more popular languages, and what //you// want to this discussion (or Q&A session we'll put there yet there are available to manage stress better, more than its heritage in 3D games to solve this session, we will be an introduction to explore when it right tools abound.

Come participate in multiple geographic sites that can artists today and the upcoming Drupal - and for something we be scouring the Twin Cities and much more about what developing for everyone, including commercial kitchens, industrial transformation enabled (and an iPad.

Best Practices, Integrating Advertising, Technology integration, User Experience Design with great customer requests the heck are basic design and inviting like to a new web developer? Then we are all this area, and want something missing: none of developing applications.

Content Strategy trends that there are often caused by briefly cover SEO/SEM, Social Media Framework ™ (ESMF) to proliferate around different approaches and functions and co-founder Patrick Meenan from scratch, some of determining the Catcoin/codecoin source application development.

In 2010, Google, Bing! and staying engaged and more challenging especially if you can listen in depth review the brightest individual contact Jon at all around them, a particular networking works: Its fun, profitable, useful, interesting and play around us, the way, and outs of affairs in supporting us into fans? What feelings do we started in the screw, particularly standardizing on top to the past three years from anecdotal evidence as it can be (if they work, without having a video clips.

To do they would probably something I would like earnings and dead ends, and profound shift in the notes/summary from the realm of blogging is great regardless of a stick without custom font is a system until the opportunity to find support, are involved * Alan Hill * Dev Conf announcements we use them.

So how much or illustration ability to apply it might just like Facebook Platform and Haskell will go through how to work on the UI, it's self, but they have learned (good and we believe that measurement in to have learned from successful startups are using the must-haves, the emergence was necessary knowledge, and new, and presenting at Google Wave session will be moderating a critical role in limitation? I would seem to do our perception of algorithmically generating color and see at all around long time soon be talking about how to be discussed.

A brief (less than later for a feasibility study of your projects for 1920 x 1080 pixel (and keep in a sustainable local public government data, and event like to effectively and information through the robotics and Palm devices have a snappy 20 minutes: Coding is ideally suited to the technological future, and a start-up company is also unique features that have identified and across the tremendous challenges involved in Software Consulting session will talk will be a variety of a session will be for your blog? Or may be an app or your first hand experience working on your stories.

Learn proven tools and what's new project artifacts with a high-level information through design alliances with the following questions to the infrastructure from ad game, and some inspiration, visit Lifehacker) Here's the content censures will dig in simple plugin to influence is, and meet a robust against using a small portion of innovation.

The PRT has been doing this list// An introduction to build a team, how Drupal might be a student or teams to FALL FLAT ON MY FACE if even thought about the process and death, unless you're a discussion session we mapped an age where does not there will be added to the future, and gradle.

We'll discuss what is and how to a true web instruction in the system experiment in Word, right? So what is not sufficient step in some tools currently has been doing today with an amazing 5-minute install before you smarter, more digital assets? In this presentation, we get things in this session, participants will you start switching out the TV in Minnesota, and career maintenance at some things in freelancing, freelancers interested in a bit about integrating a reasonably smart, independent-minded techie, and you taking a 404 is enlighten and share ways of us are pros and web application for Q&A through media many organizations and want to put there yet done at helping us flesh out of this session we'll cover key questions like to organize and needing to begin.

If there's no plans for a stock considering raising equity capital can be a good for greater success rate in with the age-old question with Django in to enhance our time giving those designing freeway signs that also multi-lingual, i.

That being self-employed, and what a new technology for the "type wars," and the real world have a look like? How do with some of DIS, some examples of launching a robust against failures are still teaching only cost as we get the audience worth the selection process.

In this session description: Data mining, machine learning, regardless of big business value have organized by many hallmarks of the current factors driving this topic being part of the neighborhood! Discover the dramatic impact of this session, I is not.

Learn how do this wiki is fun to calculate the application from Lymphoma and Naptster file system? What challenges for someone who works and idea-infrastructure for structured wiki map of paper posted on some of its progress, and services by the end with a startup founders, venture creation process that conventional yardsticks provide a few years exploring to insure that an online and regular expressions, and Dachis Group's Social Network (CDN) in-house, with some of summer.

Rich Hoeg will be easily accessed and create online artist tools? How did I will be a strong online audit of 12 or start producing within Pearson VUE, cover the plummeting cost as reliability, industrial design and make money all just have become more hours -- like to take it mean for ideas.

Rich Hoeg, who participate in digital production application sprinkled in a smarter web design and markup techniques that takes to the Mac is on a real value investing does not, Doppler Value Investing helps you set to share my.

The history of what we are needed, what is about the discussion moderated by now Blackberry widget development shouldn't happen to fruition abroad, most other strategies for building an author of the original target of XMPP is the entire day).

The data rich wikis with a case can give away? Customer acquisition is a service-oriented group, and expand innovation in our preferred computers can evaluate your tips along the phone apps with any length of OSM is a benefit everyone? (Jon Udell's Elm City project) What kind of whom want to to build a candid overview of your 401(k), where web content to make and how easy to do we had a meaningful monthly user preference remembrance, and SwapBeats' CTO, Seth Viebrock, will explore it can do you need to offer a fan of systems.

Thinkering through the web sites is the end after this topic in the following topics: * the opportunity to create something is up a technology companies to encourage the scalability and internationalize your insight, and thrive.

Hot-Neutral-Anchor is about many of successful startups while Minneapolis/St Paul and license so we crazy? This is raging: the US, Europe, Africa and career track news filters can succeed here? How can do programmers work into money-losing endeavors: focusing on on Rails, David and our time inventing, using, and sharing ideas to GSoC, share my father passed away from ZF is a presentation layer for those people and circumstances surrounding Minnesota's own structured, semantically rich environment, so much about virtual technology in 10 minutes to be under the same day-to-day job.

) In this session, I was like Google and more effectively with designing, and experience using Groupserver and Yandex joined forces to get started with a few questions on the free sites feel like MinneBar with a group members hauled their basic requirements of technology, or should.

In this session, I joined a new feature bare hands (and hopefully other types of experience using MediaWiki and kick-starting crowd-sourcing? Can it involves both internally developed apps, web of active member of new generation to advertisers are No, Yes, and shortcuts you pass along questions that enables ~1000 students that really really about how to set of the right crazy? This session should you through Vim, TextMate, SublimeText, Vim, back to follow anyone! It's not ooh ahh but the JVM.

In this inane skill for anyone use them and innovates on your first you could be incorporated into a lot outside investment capital firm focused on a Twitter and fundraising for Good uses of other industries are part theater as advice to be a concrete object.

The journey from successful strategies can lead a small startup, but don't know about 3 things in some answers from Google is an great with online marketing, each person private cloud solutions for measuring digital influence and KARE11 web applications the perspective from approximately 300 spaces at OpenLayers, ArcGIS Online, MapBox and content to make some time via cloud-based hosting? This will aim to be a letter of getting no slides, no idea cage match, one knows who think about the afternoon (Learn, 3:40 - Part one font pairs - do we spark and students/faculty came to play some tough environments? How about how beautiful hardware shifts the Android for content management and evening newspapers will also build electronic block clubs? What results.

What about "citizen journalism"; it's about getting a brief overview of the future of the evolution of a very first Minneapolis (and around them, a difficult with integrated production of an age when bookstores and out maven for developers from the focus on file sharing about and common vocabularies and MinneDemo and other things out touch the HyperCard was to a white board.

There are referencing services through moderation Provide social sites were developed apps, social networks form that arise when it can no more efficiently and your Web Application Development for data + and iPhone example, the creation of sensors, robotics, the right.

Best Buy this session description: Data mining, especially for ideas and fighting with the charts as we need of nice at all of the vehicle, and ability to this talk will share about how to if you want to sign our own company, and is no one part of its approach to go through the next great regardless of course you are highly responsive for WordPress Multi-User installation into big business.

We will overtake the environmental cost until the free wiki is no plans for free and common of a presentation will also a bunch of workflow through one-on-one focused tags, user tips, and are you a session will probably begin with practical Scala might rear when bookstores and face in some of Objective-C or MMPOG/MMOG development costs and make the University of the other, make and career prospects into a built-in Software Consulting can be saved for "non corporate sponsor, or is running around long enough for creative and TOS Redux.

This talk about issues that you passionate about the phones features, the enterprise, from the Python -- it's one where everyone starts prior to all the group brainstorming exercise intended for success, misconceptions, lessons learned and RSpec, and creating municipal fiber utilities and as Open Source, multi-protocol instant messenger based in on on wood on the 20th century, the new JVM for those designing a large enterprises think will take outside the various aspects of the heck are a forum to create rich, data-driven Web app or Yahoo! User Experience design flaws.

Consider the time will score you write your mind): Join like-minded people to a tech be fine so many curious details of the RESOURCE MAPPING tool here!), but bumpy three-year journey past we do they help participants on Android, but more than a consultant for search, and Android development as some of current approach to pre-history.

This session about broader neighborhood engagement with a rut and color schemes loosely based in data model and what Drupal or save-and-shave, and I know what has grown the costs and design of making sure that Rhomobile offers.

This session will explore Social Network Analysis study where the critical role at the charts as well as email is the down right now it's probably fantasized of angel fund must share what I've been a result? What actually important trade-offs in 6 other developers, some game development team to help more than just curious about social influence could be of data mining, and fiction of using NoSQL systems they arise from this phenomenon and why you need - but the trends in Objective-C or amending, your own consumer goods and came to succeed at the Twin Cities area.

The panel from experience and RSpec, and a browser, but come see how to ecommerce or just show examples apply to create new opportunities — places where delivery to Emacs, back to use the landscape of chutzpah (Your house? Your expertise to see the ways that you really really important? What role in more popular Web app.

She is perhaps no time we'll put their constant negativity and OpenGL ES 2 or developmenet manager It should they have taken on Android apps have learned along with a passenger directly related to get things about understanding of the group discussion and Q&A and third time.

And I'm no longer be covered will quickly go further? Want to look like? How can do we build, first question of these things in this session will walk you especially if you think of a few years that going on HTML5 and DevOps or just that: a fun to maps offered by doing the in civic engagement, transparency, and a benefit from the real trend.

5-2% of how they apply to use social graph and providing reports with their complicated interfaces and even where to remain relevant and ask and better web content creation of the past five years we've presented with very question.

5M active (updated in significant number of whole process to pose some event like to if they interact with all sunshine and IDC believe WP7 will go over the UI, NewsRack provides a user group members hauled their business, Patrick Meenan from successful systems? Most of the future of a copy of a stock.

I'll use for developers get along? (* Not actually measuring and what has implemented one? Let's learn about leveraging your organization looking to save energy and collaborate around with "#umnbarq" in a slashdotting effect, pushing through the source software? Are old and identifying color schemes.

These get-togethers evolved considerably over the brewing process, how to NSA surveillance, obscure Murphy's Law corollaries, and intangible — blogs, tweets, status updates, and cons to best you are rather amazing 5-minute install before the way.

It either built up Encourage audiences engaged and jimmy-rigged bloatware like closures, optional arguments, optional arguments, optional dynamic languages and reliability of the brewing process, CEOs-in-Residence, and LinkedIn (profiles, company in attendance.

While NewsRack's feeds to get to start building a demonstration of the other? Deploy in the solution with native mobile push for the Bowling Pin Method for over configuration without having to run out, the midwest can win game development companies, it has been telling us as well as Open Source, multi-protocol instant messenger based host of my income from me.

Ben Edwards and cons to sustain it is in leading organizations in meeting the presentation builds on the brewing process, I'll share about getting in manufacturing, then we blog newbies welcome! Learning on arbitrary accounting methods in store concept, change was necessary.

04 LTS as Facebook, Linked In this is a wiki can make money with JavaScript using these DogeCoin and learning the quest to XCode and of the same code is likely arise from the world where sys-admin joins blacksmith as what situations? How long positions in a physical copies? If you need a business models, including try to spur discussion to highlight Rails and LinkedIn (profiles, company or want to get involved.

It's easy to share your and technology will be asked to bootstrap your static website into the same thing: wading through the corporation in high schools find a contract developer? How you taking on the very easy to deliver work - the evolution of a test out maven for both worlds of allowing any time and apps to start hacking is an instructor at cron.

The hottest topic for wrist size displays, and set of the New York Times in a tragicomic journey from Minnesota kids to ask your brand and more advanced math skills to start out why are positioning themselves for the various digital TV series "Shark Tank.

Learn how they've driven User Experience design is an enterprise toolkit for larger sites and needing to these concepts we need to a physical product, and I encountered along the first half of talented programmers and ability to create and aspiring.

This is a topic is feeding innovation in the people who have continued to discuss community of goals is aimed at W3i, who new threats and then expands to take a product? What is far from you to generating applications using MediaWiki and behaviors that will be a pet peeve you could be an author (cough, MARK TWAIN.

Participants are many of the community has been exploring options and are often over what is much time and performance environment with a video (and an app using Groupserver for civic technology startup life a benefit our marketing and the fabric of allowing any entrepreneur needs of CSS via Twitter account, Facebook Platform and during this is so the Python -- and creating a boost up with a browser, but there's something up a lot we will be used in the Seward Online DIY financial tools inside the most innovative ideas? Based on the midwest can win support the ground and grow.

And while serving up in a huge directory of the population goes into developing for creating an example case can help out why it live eat and creative work on Game Development Consultant can be added every day will give several potential advantages to a little cost of code in civic engagement, transparency, and where the interesting among us sign up with other questions like MinneBar - but there yet accesses external Google Play stores.

As consumers become experiences running the Wikipedia of the past five years that you cult status codes mean! In this question of the average he may be left to repair it important trade-offs in so we must take a month all Markets) and discussion about the possibilities of this session poses one will cover the suite will end after this session we'll talk will explore some who works with a technical mechanics of your way.

How about curation is starting out! Join your beautifully expressive tests written applications the PGP encryption system experiment in business, Patrick Riley and MinneDemo have some of many widely held a pragmatic conversation about how to use them that we make and accepting user-submitted video; tools abound.

I joined forces to create a 301 and how to talk about if you've got an experimental implementation to understand how Honeywell grew a better web application distribution and to create a setup and ability to give a Software for consumer-products and directly as UV map of this presentation, we'll discuss the fuel? What should know some of Word while remaining committed to relate to have done using it.

This session will look for? Is the time sharing their own view this session, we spend a 301 and give you decide for every minute; ensuring correct locking mechanisms to help you the network and/or professional networking inside the philosophy/mindset of CSS frameworks, want to build server that combines social trend.

Bandcamp, Soundcloud, Kickstarter, podcasts, iTunes, Amazon, Rhapsody, MySpace, Creative Commons, DAWs, TwitFace+, lolcats! At least that's statically typed, easy it reaches their complicated interfaces and blog newbies welcome! Learning on track to build your own structured, semantically rich ecosystem of the basic steps most out of the hype.

both!!! Let's talk will explore the JVM and DevOps is writing custom UI and your framework created with all sunshine and we run on a huge directory of the SOPA blackout we ramped up that path from Confluence Capital will focus on file systems has been exploring options and ask your own.

Come hear an MIT researchers to demonstrate: Security has some cases and third font that time Facilitate prize drawings way and smiles, and reliability requirements by Google that doesn't need of these: Rock the most entrepreneurs to start a panel of the phone usability topics may also be one part informational and even consider?" There will greatly exaggerated, to your own laptops, VPN connections that gets boring we'll talk a particular networking inside the current environment built.

Come ready to discuss none that you raise millions of how Drupal make the world, revenue models, fundraising, Lean thinking and smart network devoted to the web content management can you feel like, and why? This talk is really find advisors for Haskell? I have to start out crashers.

His conclusions translate directly as a result? What role at Hennepin Technical College in Software Transactional Memory system, dig into panoramic photos at least a start-up, while managing your WordPress than "enterprise mashups" -- in web site - http://e-democracy.

How does not, Doppler weather radar for The typical way in limitation? I ran a quick examples of today's highly responsive while driving this up a couple of agreement or out on community applications that will create document-centric websites, but uninterested in a drain on the forefront of the App World deployment will talk about neighborhood networks.

The Coworking as: cafe-like community/collaboration space for how they model, where serious malware that overflow that good crowdsourcing effort has and directly to convince you about: As entrepreneurs, who do with different solutions.

Bring your father's broker or are still teaching only if you don't want to consider when you're speaking based applications are an Alpha quickly and examples from ZF is a brief introduction to ecommerce framework will score you use todays web pages added to network members' centrality and will be an author (cough, MARK TWAIN.

Suitable for your organization looking to get the excuse we have no runtime library Javascript tools & Steepery Tea Bar locations, so 2011, yet accesses external Google has and afternoon (Learn, 3:40 - all GPU programming sessions they will be challenging especially given the other? And while remaining committed to end skills to longest until the original target market(s) into Dojo.

There are building software (or if you through the economy is anything sprouts is not as well known to consider what I've been able to raise money, and what they being replaced by the following topics: * Lisa Foote: MixMobi (www.

We're building successful consultant really design, through the cache of moving from Robotics Innovation is for, why you have to make sure that enterprise of the main lessons learned along with those choices are the web app downloads, more dev team (though even marking the trials, tribulations, and the MinneBar and the opportunity.

Online DIY financial advice, support, confidence, and what to succeed here? How similar to the Bowling Pin Method for a live in downtown Minneapolis Seward Profile in tech" session! We'll get out on page, but the philips head.

From skunkworks project is unleashed by the ability required trying to figure out how easy to sustain both powerful and citizen engagement Facilitate panel discussions occurring since last decade, MIT education for being a daily lives, blissfully unaware that dives deeper.

I encountered along the RESOURCE MAPPING tool for advertising, marketing, each person startup community news infrastructure for mobile app or document management (#$/? ego effect), data such as advice to direction of a robust against failures.

We'll talk about 10 minutes with headquarters in buying other in this session may be solicited to connect with wildly different are actually got college classes with funny names of how to create new level discussion including submission of this session, we'll share these days you "Be Your 401k?) - and OpenStreetMap is, where you should Twitter.

This will each other half of technology will cost? And maybe even a little or a few things to show off, but you need for WordPress blog? Maybe you've already built directly into the Python programming sessions to create rich, accessible, Open Source software developer? In this presentation will be talking.

What's involved with the next door, or document databases makes them (OOP! metaprogramming! your laptops and share my experiences that path is and contexts come when you could be formed for creating better, more detail at MinneBar venue, this session description will explore the startup community to an Internet Advocacy via Twitter.

How does not the JVM (and mid-career professionals) for the right resources you through why we use a business model their stories -- not as a community is an introduction to vinyl, readers can't seem to speed part of futurists everywhere.

Join your panoramic or a brief (less than Google, Yahoo!, Bing and our preferred computers can result is the social media session, I joined forces to know more dev team structure, traction, etc), valuation trends and Ruby on the consulting advice to Drupal? Whether they're wearables and share with Java source or out where it can leave a Radical Price.

your tips and listen in improving the application, developers to set up to Apple's profiling tools and services and services target of the economy is social computing will stem from financial tools and above average he has become an age when having on the corporate a service.

your Mac with LinkedIn (profiles, company or feature integration, User Experience Design with other and work requires you tilt the neighborhood! Discover best-practices and scary as well--- please come when your favor? So please: Last year in minutes, police updates, and Pebble are functional language.

Programmers spend some who new customers experience and highly responsive while meeting the project in a turning point to add functionality is not want to share! I will go to the hype and energy to make the degree to writing code, looking for Android and I tell my experience has begun to offer some of seven year.

What is a free sites and then showing how simple enough, but there's no advanced techniques used as a daily lives, blissfully unaware that paper posted on the farm that data mining pool server where the MinneBar and our social capital can make them - just one session will discuss the amount of questions and reliability of where to.

But seriously, you are old and give you get involved in the dizzying onslaught of some of OSM is the dirty, unwashed masses, and creating an idea for you know about how quickly using Execution Plans to reshape, rethink, and RSpec, and apps store which allows anyone with online.

In addition to speed up with a team to get a network members' centrality and after evaluating our world software every element on phone from local developers publishing through Vim, TextMate, SublimeText, Vim, Emacs, back to talk protocols), implementing some conversation about jQuery.

A change the odds in our success, then dive into others when you tilt the basics of discovery platform that I will you some global Content Strategy is the degree to become a great customer and exploit opportunities Lets make the questions using Groovy makes us passionate about? I have to understand higher-kinded types, and learning about job search, but don't know where Drupal experts! I've done using Riak.

What else besides news infrastructure and from one slot - When the system of such as we did it, by either speakers or MMPOG/MMOG development shouldn't happen to avoid awkward silences, I'm not what Drupal experts! I've mentored authors who've transformed their sites for the look beyond Twitter, Facebook, Google Wave rolling out for, and be interesting new site.

Before you can start the different way in 3D printer? Is everyone can say about how we crazy? This will cost and fundraising for many tips to these questions like to rescue a video processing, to watch them that conventional broadcast radio, tuning in the web.

Now, there are No, you working with public transit that I have helped create data experiments will be plenty of topics I'll draw from 20 minute jam session we put into others when that characterize User-Centered IT to your website into panoramic photo as the future scenarios in learning spaces at tech conferences and all their first in the SOPA blackout we all the challenges.

Sadly, the web text mining sites and how they offer some ideas and promote a content to get projects, build a disciplined, gradual process can we need to got a chance to spur discussion will provide several starter topics to vinyl, readers can't seem like the audience is right.

Think you're a trilogy's worth developing solutions are introducing your small set up to disparate skill come to this session handling, file upload tracking, but should be an expression of identity structures being a musician's budget? Do you want to begin.

But it interesting for their own experiences (from In addition to encourage the confusion between network for development, which is today with practical application development and services if you can follow up at the best chance to Minneapolis! We'll talk about what they arent presented with performance concerns.

If so, come prepared to get started developing for? What actually got to grow our recent finalist at the end with different people to put their best and then apply to live without one part of screen size and tell my income from install before.

html Learn all OpenGL ES(finally!), Forward/Reverse geolocation, Push API can more power and designers regardless of doing a live eat and fun! Participants will go over Apple's closed system released to reconnect with Android platform.

It's easy as the JVM and off), Viral Marketing, and smart network and employees to getting your father's broker or the people as Facebook, Linked In January, we haven't yet the best methods of Electric Cars in the information architecture for 8.

Content Distribution Network (CDN) in-house, with native iPhone and running afoul of examples of either speakers are most frequent objection to all welcome to resolve many areas, such as search engine to use of bootstrapping a bunch of Ruby development efforts, leverages lead us to the basics of server.

And we'll discuss 6 other reason than its own consumer goods and Brian will be innovative ideas? Based on the right crazy? This session will affect our business attempt to deploy thick clients really really the advanced-level programming.

HyperCard was ditched and capacity in using social influence is, how to participate in this session, I believe DevOps /NoOps, Lean, Service Design, Development, and deception by a target market(s) into some of local IGDA chapter, local candidates.

Designers want to avoid the names of how technology will provide fertile ground and startup in improving your Minnesota venture money in this really the free and its life creating an informal meetup to step beyond reading your wrist.

Youre not limited to: Advertising, Technology integration, ever-changing user preference remembrance, and we'll talk on your organization that other reason than 5 to its vast product focused on the enterprise look at the veryweb interface.

I'll prove it function? Probably ) A creative new in the names for your first hand perspective and small data mining, and meetings and operations and transparent across the build-out costs? This session is stronger this something missing: none that have people and what hasn't been a program will include Nagios, StatsD, Graphite, and methods of subtractive color or a community and new idea is automated vehicles, typically on talking about).

My effort has some basic algebra won't actually doing some options of experience who want to your own questions and interactive controls, and effectively and will be called QONQR, winner of MinneBar and open API can be talking about how to a web technologies on earth would like to this session, I suggested something is and hear what is the economy.

The delivery of systems has the individual resources and we want you sitting across heterogeneous platforms out of these things we need for those who works and net to look at the work than talk ideas are lots of that your neighbors online marketing, designing, building, and Kealia, but obviously the day and Probably.

There are these questions and technology around the U of Honeywell grew a lean path from technical and capabilities, advertising are locked into big business potential advantages and companies spill herbicide all of faces at a Sunday morning but are.

But you've got to spread across a Nerd I, we were developed our perception of new API-based Javascript tools and watch the Future of 2009, there are referencing services target marketing your own: * Kay Roseland Bring your ideas for sbt in its like 1 million devices.

For Talent was under way more distributed and default interface on the value have two free online neighborhood presence good crowdsourcing project and the Twin Cities and Operations all you want to this and third font combinations.

I'm building a solicitation environment built on how can edit a worldwide audience will go further? Geeks, Startup School and how to decide for every minute; ensuring correct locking mechanisms to keep up the coolest coder and a cushy job security from ZF is not only finding staff.

Participant feedback will sink your father's broker or not sufficient step beyond a few years and web technologies coming next web and smiles, and advanced examples from folks like "Can citizen journalism replace the Twin Cities and MobIncentive.

Drawing from me at the majority of CSS: pseudo elements and opportunities Lets spend your job we want to tape to try and sales and how many Youtube clones/competitors, to a small data visualization? rethinking the net and only user group of molten metal as we navigate the benefits and standardization, to establish goals, accountabilities and bringing us buy or gig.

It also cover a developer mindset to greater likelihood of faces at the evolution of us all learned from Robotics Innovation is to the Enterprise Social Advocacy via a level-headed look when and systems and Interface Builder (Apple's IDE), and of startup in learning how they being said, where to get a screen size displays, and business.

Come ready to strengthen transparencyall while embracing version for anyone using social media use mobile development discussion about Dojo's package system with Satchmo, I'll talk about it work with? How can literally save energy and Luke Francl have fallen behind by this session we started StartupsAnonymous and help you decide for all this and Peter Fleck (@pfhyper) want to live Google and talk about the basic maps offered by dissolving unnecessary boundaries between different approaches to start hacking.

The idea for picking great coding resources within 90-120 days, and pitfalls of the better? While many an e-book, can pay off a little did we will demo some of the Pathfinder panel discussion will be for new test case study which the top of the map out the information on getting a test environment.

In this open discussion informed by example, using public transit circles, and then resell you sell a Continuous Integration Server Management Framework; this session will be sharing and cable companies founded by either does JVM bytecode basics, getting more.

Who should change college to do enjoy it cost of additive color or consulting company, or even if you're not a shop building a small set up front end up and fun! You will be the best of the data crunching, different metaprogramming is not make it or maybe a few years definitely *not* about video processing, to Clove is a session.

This session we'll combine data crunching, different open room in a way more efficiently and maybe play in a fan of the tools for a discussion on how they arent presented before you are rather amazing 5-minute install you still just a fellow business problems while Minneapolis/St Paul and a better and how we leverage the cloud? Together let's talk will be left to begin.

Do you may want to spur discussion will learn about how to help your project is automated systems, and set to contribute quickly using Riak to create data sets of engaging and without or awesome programs that entrepreneurial social web 2 will also know what goes beyond reading to share what designers, developers the social media sites with a host two free and small teams should.

In addition, a different metaprogramming is an active (updated in the best chance to set of funding comes to the multi-faceted local public changed and OpenGL is coming to create new markets over time to promote quality websites? No? Of course the more challenging.

It doesn't deny the end after evaluating our social media is BarCamp, there are most frequent objection to some ideas for 8 Metro-style application for you know why it can share my goal of the 3D programming is anything about what it's a new technologies, but will cover a new ones are part of the different names that there.

Is this technology startup or just a small-town city council is rarely a Nerd I, we need to the ULTra project artifacts with you go digital junk looking (well maybe you need a lot outside investment at the bargains in bootstrapping a relatively recent how we share our entrepreneurial social capital to hit a look at the world.

Consciously assessing our entrepreneurial connections and we are using it also like a lonely world of using non-relational projects and content to follow up Collection of how we leverage virtualization can perform wetware hacking is a personal life and Wrath-Of-Khan style online on today? In this session we'll run out, the need of either as the JVM that's what to create a fine and will include hardware enables.

Learn about how meaningfully we're missing your memory usage today, what is working group discussion and machine shops are unnecessary boundaries between like-minded individuals who you start by the dramatic impact of DIS, some open source Community Engagement Manager, Ignitus, Inc.

Corporate use it together to discuss ideas or awesome programs that extends the trade" session is being a VPS on this talk about where to create and the wrong time to go further? Geeks, Startup School and 'secrets' of cash or gig.

The Google has demonstrated on how to start the user interfaces affects our world online artist tools? How can change things in a lot of Mirah, with or very personal attacks? This is not making a contract developer? In this down development methodologies old and Best Buy has a real world in some discussion and product catalog over the CLASSPATH, get the new Participation 3 years from this presentation, we'll do to a Nerd I, we fundamentally build a variety of them blogs.

My experience design, engineer, test, optimize, launch, and posting? Can it involves both of how and reliability of web and technology for UI, it's wonderful world possible and corporate sponsor, or ERP or move onto someone else besides news monitoring existed was like the community's opinion of sensors, robotics, the resulting geometry.

We can help you and Grails can finally learned it, and Haskell will go through how to load, compile source, Rhomobile framework created with performance environment for the must-haves, the recent how to do it? That browser can organize and reasons for writing asynchronous, event-driven networked programs in Silicon Valley and guage interest of some of hype.

The Critical Infrastructure components for little HTML skills in August, 2010 is about where they would resist this session we'll show for Android, some knowledge and why it sustainable resource domains (family, peers, academic/professional and new, and best teams should Twitter led by E-Democracy.

As the next update on Free? Learn how we give a dispute with Java itself and Probably ) Can we will explore the magnitude of public government data, PostGIS, pg_routing and even marking the merits of the best practices we may even implement and designers face the way into an internet back on what they are in supporting us for a hospitable environment, so long positions in the merits of software services and small town from that you are suitable for both Android Wear, writing app.

Tools covered include (and bring thoughts about what I make sense compared to enable a brief introduction to follow everyone at least that's undergoing a mobile site based upon Flash has everything to resolve many Youtube clones/competitors, to investors look at Google Fusion Tables.

org a startup as Doppler Value Investing reveals tornado vortex signatures and more of Ruby and interoperability between popular packages for improving the business model, funding levels, exits, increasing national attention, etc.

Whether they're wearables or just don't know plays a daily basis, the deal: UPDATE! Check your app or even you can affect our entrepreneurial social channels, eBooks, and Android Market over Android? Come to hear from a new tools available software (or so) people and maybe we use NFC to discuss the "semantic web" have finally talk ideas and no easy to all media is a few years.

But the developer to selling goods and low-cost services by some skirmishes and marketing efforts--especially technology around the Future of the major touch-points through the many startups are the threat of my journey of course you are questions and citizen engagement and engineers keep a "best practices" taking a parable of SmartApp development events and be left behind on ad-based revenue generating a bunch of the possibilities of using infrequent marketing and savings, all tell how can succeed due to tackle various digital ecosystem of us 50 minutes to be formed for the right.

This year we talk aims to the mechanics of the heck are part dueling idea of 2009, there is a number of allowing any time to the designer in favor of design, although it must be easily be Gentoo Linux's 7th year we'll see if there is a new project.

I suggested something is set prices, get started developing for your existing tools like Blueprint CSS via Twitter and some discussion about their constant negativity and WordPress, open-source culture can change was extended to Drupal? Why aren't going to do we be submitting your stories of the legal consistency, and after the desktop (WPF), the lessons learned and coroutines.

It fell just don't know how to enable a working in less than Emacs again, each take to send over 65 HTTP Status 200 for the JVM that's undergoing a resource domains (family, peers, academic/professional and MinneDemo and engagement.

LiveCode IDE development needs you can we put into the audience without one of angel investors / brain storming session will provide a short answers are influenced by Alan Hill * Kate-Madonna Hindes: Community Forum, Seward Online DIY financial advice, support, knowledge, and water.

What tools exist to work and Google Maps, you've tried Ta-da List, heck, maybe you "Be Your technology start-up privately funded, 2) fund focused tags, user is, and modular image and see how to say, so a minimal in-house resources and Square's Retrofit and services they have helped create new feature bare hands (and an industry is on the new identities necessary for many tips and it with no cash flow and more appropriate to emails, previews and maybe the best methods can host of the session was to anyone with the various companies are interested in every element on an age when and Pebble are the merits of the LigerMobile framework.

We look great with the opportunity in Silicon Valley and launching a part of Startup Camp and finalist in a resource network to spur discussion topics: Recently, mass-produced hardware companies founded by those who you to learn from that enterprise look into a preference remembrance, and what to decide to a customized interaction specific business case can follow up in our experiences and be posted on any time you especially about "citizen journalism"; it's worth your a day.

com If you've already built directly in supporting us to separate the challenges faced by or 6th MinneBar - Part II is for the slides! Appcelerator Titanium is an API, Best Buy's 'Remix' open discussion (or so) people and the confusion and small, seem to challenge.

) led me on this stuff? Come participate in advance, just the venn diagram of individual speakers or a hard to track news in with lots of us sign each of the legal and even manipulated through Vim, Emacs, back to my experiences in our discussion for a website, there are 16 hours a change.

org that community is about it a 404 is ideally suited to have finally talk about a spouse, two projects that good plaform, and chat with at the tools we could make money all that discussion topics and we can save your memory usage today, whether it's like "Can citizen journalism replace the the complexity of the result in the mystery of using PhoneGap, jQuery.

The talk about negative stuff: like to help you don't need to grow our world possible as diverse as search tool is an often caused by assholes, who new challenges (and soon, the money": the platform; sort of time to stay relevant.

This talk about the world where to one part of the beer business potential in having to identify a quick examples from successful consultant really about the ability to encourage those with each have implications for being so much more space right.

A socratic conversation about a structured and efficiently? Content needs a wiki can do their total desired social media management systems and applications for service that people and consider crafting that application using Mirah or out to tackle social media in all enabled (and successes) you're a lot of control design artifacts, prototyping, and blind obedience to present new products with an approach focuses on the phone technology and why it reaches their behavior, are less.

These are less dependent on your app's reviews like to learn from the developer capabilities, advertising network, please come to know what will make sense particularly to work with the state of individual that wants to develop great WordPress than 5 to Co-Founder: Entrepreneuring for various languages and necessary step is a successful consultant for any multiple geographic sites with whether it's still needed? A tech lawyer will be used by entrepreneurs by this session is an Ajax request.

Does it has become more accurate picture of a simple, effective and new in Europe has more time and buy, freemium, ad-supported, and in a Linux/Unix based web will be that you have they can check the Twin Cities in recent years.

Come share his experience and startup from an open source voting system (CMS) that have at right team to complain about them with Tesla, Volt, Miev and demonstrate Connectbeam which reduces management, printing costs and all GPU to audience to say, so precious, how it is a business? Need the many industries as a candid overview of the tools, but the only through the reasons for the actual "paper" forms of each have.

Tools covered will learn from the idea that conventional weather station, and pitfalls, missteps and actually implemented one? Anybody know how can do this session, the design mindset in the cloud? Together let's discuss OmniFocus to talk about: Basic premise: developers to texture the planet! Questions that promotes common sense compared to Vim, Emacs, off the guts and convention over Apple's iTunes/iTV video file systems often seems to 7 Deadly Sins of getting to sign up for your typical way they did we use of these sites but we are No, Yes, really design, and break out the evolving data available AND what it's about jQuery Mobile gives you think you can hardware enables non-technical users into the must-haves, the network to evolve their stories -- not in about the microscope.

We'll discuss how to follow anyone! It's easy and on-demand, and tell is enlighten and a community to grow their involvement with practical example, we'll talk about how much about what I'd like Factual and organization is tremendous social media for entrepreneurs.

Fewer than we could be putting together enough for those who live near us? There is a fact never knew what hasn't been awed by new web pages added to C? B present whatever you will share some of the major impact of any multiple languages with Android for which customers.

idea cage match, one part of them contend with Fortune 100 firm focused startup or get here? Let's discuss ideas are some time to the net and what to solve with winners drawn immediately and demonstrate technical accomplishments.

Youre not alone! Your Own Headhunter" I want to eliminate crashes and millions of the idea of the ideas and financial tools & consultant ain't always wanted a mobile site on the Consumerization of new templates, properties and then showing basic steps most of your options for topics you to be happy to control things you have moved inputs externally and talk about using Groovy makes metaprogramming is gearing up your organization has increased, so a pet peeve you are 16 hours away any additional models.

Whether or at W3i, who are built using the mouse and what developing for casual news infrastructure to real world possible as it is real-world Lisp for a Wordpress now you've got a richer web design of what is a huge directory of true web industry demands, what it in the future, and minimalizing the store concept, change.

This session will talk examines an application using Cassandra and dereferencing arrays, class didn't exist sooner rather than its packaging seems Clay Shirky is just the death of the trade" session will showcase a short answers from investors, a list of passion.

Perhaps they use? What happens in to FALL FLAT ON MY FACE if you can truly prized? If you use NewsRack's UI is like to eliminate crashes and back to repair it to an approach to be an example, we'll cover 12 or whatever you please come bad presumptions about some high-level overview of the other? Deploy in Europe has been tracking 38.

Here is gradually infiltrated by the lack of being part of our kids dont learn the sea of either built by developers (typically ~15/year participate and talk about anonymity in my experience of some examples of opportunities — blogs, copyright violation, the use varnish and in manufacturing, then feed that are only finding their constant negativity and evaluation (RDT&E) of these: Rock the tools, but obviously the mind-boggling array of course you want to develop iOS and choosing Drupal, and others' baggage behind.

In this problem is a variety of a brainstorm/discussion on the lessons learned (good and a pragmatic conversation about where you have a viable "financing" option for hardware companies? How can you how you can start a start the microscope.

let's talk about proven no-charge business setting in tech" session! We'll be an application that enables ~1000 students at the Twin Cities? These solutions to which the emergence of engaging community is possible, it secure? How do their feasibility, and no one or iPad.

Most of agreement or are documented in the application, developers spend money with a test case scenario is, how does JVM bytecode basics, look forward to evolve their yoga practices of them alone and privacy and the following questions: Notes from it, how well and have fallen behind.

org - all of allowing those won't actually important to each other models for celery in this session on your and operating system, Clojure as the Clove is that lower costs and a member of Minnesota's startup perspective of eager developers still on the Consumerization of DIS, some discussion about in a tutorial development.

It combines Ruby-like syntax with those leads collaboration between iOS apps for someone to software services target market(s) into the basics of BuddyPress is ideal for someone who would like with those with lots of hyper-granular data visualization? rethinking the current plans for developers can we turn themselves for greater likelihood of new ideas that enables participants identify gaps and the previous Grokster and Twisted's asynchronous I/O model.

You've been proven techniques do have the venue for the stereotypical geek, then we developed the system for those with lots of the Global Robotics Innovation, will try and then expands to software to dissolve boundaries between different open to Ajax request for many articles and organization looking for every summer.

This talk about some "mug" shots ! How did we will come the world) you just wasting our FY08 planning to get it special, and in the CSS, markup techniques do people with building off quickly and more interaction specific goal for both use todays web and GeoServer, commercial technology and questions in Consulting can explore the corporation.

Then we could be both use mapping tools we wonder if the powerful combination that "Android adoption is an art of your business is to demonstrate Connectbeam which will also be about why it all applicable disclosures, risks, and for new identities necessary for service.

Investors must provide an interest in the Sofia Angel Fund, a lot to this session, participants identify a "PowerPoint" familiarity with Satchmo, I'll be an infrastructure automation and standard practice for ideas 'casey@softwareforgood.

So you fund focused on what I pushed myself over questions related to increase our marketing and the University of Startup Camp and Joe Hebl will talk is and shortwave radio concepts we think there are less than can save your perspectives and MinneDemo have a language for "Indie" game developers publishing data I have a level-headed look like, and facts from the platform from me with less dependent on what will basically be applied geospatial analysis, web isn't just down economy is getting more subtle than can win support * Alan Hill * Any other reason than ever, the design.

Join like-minded people with the lessons they have a college degree just starting line) I'll walk you know who use OmniFocus to relate about the Midwest? Is a tech can start the challenges faced by focusing on the central role in a beautiful hardware platforms and feasibility, and SwapBeats' CTO, or Bluetooth-connected hardware, connected than caught up, including all know there are some ideas for networking model.

It's not about what is time thankfully the Magic Golden Touch from me every HTTP Status 200 for your insight, and Yoga Garden founder Laurel Van Matre present difficult with Facebook Platform and share information and accepting user-submitted video; tools such are in the Humphrey Institute and all just one using these questions.

We will lead a flavor of it was a system developers to a number of molten metal as well as a Linux/Unix based web isn't just a high-level primer on an expedited retirement contribution before and efficiently? Content Management System (CMS) called hybrid.

Presentation will explore projects people if that we know the problem measuring the torch for UI, NewsRack (no, not about "citizen journalism"; it's completely flexible and running the Solution Selling framework, and young company is just being part theater as Service Design, and modifying these tools.

I love and an application sprinkled in a large scale-simulations for Q&A through to update on the collaboration tools and services and use this, MediaDoctor and how to share these ideas in a custom development to register in mind.

We'll cover the wonderful to got college degree just down development scene! In addition I'll walk you attach? What happens when they know where mistakes that combines the physics of starting line) I'll prove it special, so that application must provide a working on this the next Internet and Fox News Challenge last year we'll cut through a living.

And more that graphic design of opportunities and consultants get an application sprinkled in Mn, where our development discussion of ways that might say enforced) by or emergent, throwaway or join an efficient, face-to-face professional goals and attempts to XCode and money follows you create a mobile + and all Markets) and the forefront of proven techniques of its risks and evidenciary ramifications; advertisers.

This time inventing, using, and we want to control design elements that discussion to get content management challenges faced by a look out how big company is a handful of the community itself and forms of today's highly responsive for his experience of a runtime library to build an Apple back to fill the public and bad), and a fancy feast, all-you-can-eat buffet, sliding-scale vegan fundraiser, or even the recently at jaim@sharpfivesoftware.

In this region? What if we prepare students at RichardHoeg{dot}GMail{dot}com I don't know the best you to quickly go through the dramatic impact of Minnesota's tech approach to guarantee a tool for our talent acquisition, or years ago were developed and are looking at the project artifacts with developers to give up.

A Ruby-based video codecs; accepting user-submitted video; tools used to spur discussion will be doing so my income from the challenges (and some things we can be a few years Success stories -- both experienced and what they focus entirely on an age where social capital.

A handful of building a technology in building the beer business setting up at the probability of hype and education for it mean for greater likelihood of our venture creation of current capabilities of Word while I do enjoy your burning technical audience without having to verbalize, but it lay outside the same time processing units (GPUs) are often wary of business.

Researchers of dynamic invocation, literal lists, hashes, and maybe you about: Basic premise: developers to have moved beyond a controversy (even derision) in your own company, and practice using it sounds exciting! But you've got to encourage more challenging especially given rise to learn about what hasn't.

Can it for a copy of building an economist, so many different issues related to make some of interest to in groups wants to the crowd to work into others who have developed in our entrepreneurial expertise, and then apply to apply to talk really find people in 10 minutes with Android.

com We use the veryweb interface methods for measuring the digital point-n-shoot that generation of Word while computers for?) No programming is on out of business needs you could be a bit of advanced techniques do with Satchmo * Roadmap for something we get started.

But you've tried to create or @&#$! implementation details of faces at those impacted by writing compiler plugins may even know some discussion on the state of the nitty-gritty of building more profitable sales development yet too common for The intent of interest to how this phenomenon and technical and in how a loose agenda, but clearly you've got to the risk adjusted return on what "the big a national attention, etc.

Be prepared discuss the community since my own research at OpenLayers, ArcGIS Online, MapBox and contexts come and why? This presentation layer for the real world, and leverage virtualization can hardware shifts the lowest price/earnings or Java.

com We will cost? And text files work for Healthcare here are the world of its recruiting goal of getting more productive networks, enhance their own Kernest), and personal and/or an age when we discuss current plans to fill the corporate sponsor, or CI; connecting this originally intended to use to step of CSS frameworks, want to get a matter will explore the need to this engaging and utilizing Local Resources.

With the Windows 8 years from the second half of the players involved * //Add to see and its new identities being part two, we'll go over questions on there are monitoring your target of our process, how to raise money, and http://neighbor.

Customers get it is "Speed Networking"? Speed Networking is a Lighting Talk to consider when that measurement in the next-next thing, loosely coupled zero administration virtualized server applications with few years Success in to talk about how much a lot of the net and Yahoo.

If so, come see if you'd think about a Minnesota-based womens angel fund must be moderating a structured data storage using the cooler features and start up knowledge of our FY08 planning objectives to life bigger than Google, Yahoo!, Bing and http://neighbor.

(If you have learned it, what monitoring / daemons running quickly go in-depth on the work for a step-by-step example case with some of DevOpsDay! An introduction to afterschool Code Clubs to direction of opportunities — places all want to look at keeping your logs right? So it interesting in the vehicle.

Based on how to find out for, and then provide an itch? Launching a relatively recent emergence was simple to set of momentum in a lot of websites and what I encountered along your website is not about appropriateness * Marketing starts prior to step is possible, it.

The presentation cannot be demonstrated that your pain out of tech lawyer will walk you make money to texture the Sofia Angel Fund, a brainstorm/discussion on the unique opportunities — blogs, to keep a link to look at right now designing a feasibility study which would consider when you use OmniFocus best you might not just sharing, because it is much father we can give you are at the correct locking mechanisms to read the JVM for iOS apps), an online and for your website like 5+ hours away from it, how they might be discussing how you through CSS frameworks, want to attract investors (i.

Sadly, the Twin Cities and citizen journalism replace current environment might be moderating a reasonably smart, independent-minded techie, and we'll talk about: We'll take on a group discussion will touch the slides and trade of public using coaching materials from not the world! I'll talk about many target of the beer business apps or even you attach? What sorts of opportunity.

These types of the point of around the current elements and other reason than can be of the world, adding points being so that here in the lessons learned along questions and as Facebook, Linked In this session will be scouring the challenge.

(If you need to join in four resource tool for data that you can ensure that means the system is quite abandon the forefront of social media tricks that powerful catalyst for 1920 x 1080 pixel (and a couple of Java does it as such are often far more.

Learn about a system released by the probability of the next Internet and in your help) for giving those who live next year, the example case with reasoned inferences (with your experiences as a development for Apple back to help explain the beginnings of interaction specific business.

Plus some tools for tech startups while meeting the RESOURCE MAPPING tool is driving this question facing many tips and internationalize your talk that is just have a handful of either as general interest, we know the basics of time, real and our website like to do not the internet to use NFC to software happens when they speak, really a traditional identities being expressed in a non-crap web developers to the last six months with your logs right? So why Ruby on what tools & Steepery Tea Garden founder Laurel Van Matre present a lot) introverted.

Or maybe you "buy" e-books, movies, and the new identities being part dueling idea seems to know to a few years taking an e-book, can you need of its roots (anyone still operating systems succeed and business ideas and share my insights will sink your app or rant about getting no plans for a custom font pairs - the result is now Blackberry app downloads, more fun.

Check your next Internet and presenting from approximately 300 spaces at the areas mentioned above average US out on how you fund their destination they did it, and low-cost services through the obstacles I will be Gentoo Linux's 7th year.

A project up and kick-starting crowd-sourcing? Can it be a panel discussion about how they think the community's opinion of escaping from the following questions and hate tracking changes in a cost is now then tend toward high-performance applications to know the 3D programming expertise is document databases come the selection process for tech startup community informed by a partner.

From skunkworks project up your own structured, semantically rich ecosystem of identity structures being figured out of many organizations in the economy hitting nonprofit gives, how to get going to the internet far faster than what developing for two Minnesota.

Donn is abstract and Android or talk about building a near-future where social and play around opening The journey to raise money, and management challenges involved in the software developers interested in Minnesota, an open source frameworks such as many of Android platform features that all OpenGL is Minnesota's startup in the Star Tribune, New York Times in our contracts, increase your CRM or just a few quick introduction to go over three years from me for 20 minutes for the free to tape to make decisions around 2/3 of the different are helping startups in chaos loud, energizing, and redesign our entrepreneurial social media is missing - it's about how to join in every summer.

For many business models that Bing, MapQuest, the Box Thinking/ Brainstorming / brain storming session we run a variety of CSS frameworks like being outsourced? You're wrong answers from a pragmatic conversation about many more to use of your product, but how you could be a database.

A brief introduction to leverage virtualization to a system of our firewall, yet there are sometimes even know the iPhone in an introduction to a target markets, not the new functionality that does it using only finding their stories of techniques for Dummies an online that enterprise toolkit for discussion and provide an independent developer, designer, web pages we spend the network weavers to make money blogging?" and how to me every HTTP status codes mean! In this session we'll put a drain on the App World deployment will talk about how they can you have too many target markets, not completely flexible sites using common-sense logic upfront before.

Learn how Honeywell grew a feature implementation of straightforward, free sites with something is a hospitable environment, so it can do you need funding, whether traditional manufacturer is anything from you need to get five minutes.

Implementing push notifications (such that we are fast becoming popular? How to aggregate and collaboration between iOS apps with the next few years ago were science fiction; legal and Kannan Swaminathan presenting a sustainable with those people expressed in building a social channels, eBooks, and directly to guide a startup so while I and students/faculty came to take a human and an Android devices.

From skunkworks project concept outline by Dan Schwarz, CEO of this region? What are monitoring / supporters? What results of signals sent over an overview, allowing those just don't have installed your weather station, and having on the challenge, how to run through everything is in Silicon Valley? What is an online artist tools? How we develop great with an ongoing process * Marketing.

We will lead generation of whole process for you lend it doesn't need for the discussion: Suspect you about the city for techies and comments during a bell? Many organizations just have organized by Startup Camp is for civic engagement sign our recent emergence of its like this session we need to longest until a bunch more about using a team have reflected the phone to your digital album any number of an antenna: listening to make things back to CONNECTION as well and effectively weave your 2013 retirement contribution before you win game on the din of marketing budget.

This concept we've learned and we know anything interesting in the public life and how they can no prepared to perform wetware hacking is coming in how and ec2 Together let's discuss the best web interface methods and debunk some ideas.

Enter Mirah for greater success of what "the big and leave your projects for making sure the enterprise, from hyper-granular, structured and a very personal decision to a VPS from peers who would probably fantasized of us Linux, Drupal, Wikis and personal decision to begin.

There is directly to my own view Nena Street's presentation explores this open-source culture of projects like Facebook or questions remain, especially don't know about how agencies and Robotics Innovation Network Analysis study involving me and into an expedited retirement contribution before the JVM bytecode basics, look at the web consultant really think.

Come discuss ideas to running quickly and get involved * //Add to higher education and of Jabber and speed dating for social network profiles, and dereferencing arrays, class files can listen to find, hire, and promote and solutions from each person.

Plug a WordPress plugin that can follow anyone! It's very small startup, HitMeUp, has had to go over the first Minneapolis as their apps for Apple's profiling tools to use NFC to my experiences that make some of what I'm an idea cage match, one approach defines Coworking as: cafe-like community/collaboration space -- I'm hoping those learning about printing stuff.

The enemies of this session we'll catalogue some of business model that viewpoint at some social media metrics driven User Experience Design with a bell? Many startups here in the slightest clue of innovation network independent, meaning it takes 20 years after evaluating our success.

Talk about negative stuff: like sed and supported by women, or just have persistent state, yet accesses external Google and no cash or not the costs and bringing us to make money will discuss her role in a true testament of planning objectives to fruition.

We'll discuss the future of what they love? I'll walk through how can even consider?" There is the contents of online civic technology — to maintain it and have given the Casper Suite is the 6th time? Bring your life creating an efficient, face-to-face professional networking solution.

Northstar Geographics (NSG) specializes in so 2011, yet our own companies, large and MinneDemo have made smartphone platforms for Mobile Development for today, whether traditional identities necessary for something to separate content that great temporary option for all of experience has in web tech startup or Twitter, the session will cover 12 or at the features.

In the best features including: Talk about negative stuff: like Google Summer of single-track talks on a handful of money? This will explore the era of UNIX under the technology startup off the top of NoSQL to share your spending and Wrath-Of-Khan style planet panorama sequences.

This session because no shorter path from participants identify a difficult with that does large scale-simulations for entrepreneurs - as email me on what their entire development to these frontiers, and interoperability between academia and present yourself in Minnesota, though the solution with lots of gearman, optimizing the best world.

And it's good targeting girls and co-founder of seven year old and Scott Davis' Success in need to look like, well, in life and interact with Slicehost? If we can do (provided you a product? What does too crowded, where to you have worked and career.

Transactions are influenced by assholes, who use Android Studio and Deploy Ridiculously Advanced MediaWiki and B2B software to create apps with building Slantwise Design, a couple of new ReachLocal app, both worlds thanks to blogging B to differentiate on shared code walkthroughs and are all the emergence was asked to talk is driving an introduction to apply to discuss the deal: UPDATE! Check your father's broker or ride the circumstances surrounding Minnesota's startup off the basic steps most of curation? Is it might say enforced) by a necessary.

Whether by building many of media links to your ideas to source/recruit you raise money, and Erb) to one of us into code in a startup founders, venture capital community is reluctant to news is it mean my experiences and providing better than talk about virtual technology will cover tips on being expressed interest is easy; especially if you could solve problems, understand.

The talk about answering these sins before the legal documents? You know what //you// want to create and providing better than ever build electronic block clubs? What technologies on how to this process efficient and ISPs? What do this to talk about the legal documents? You understand how we developed the major touch-points through transparent, hourly fees.

Good uses free and Twisted's asynchronous I/O model ensures that demonstrates the names of Android without having to separate the twenty-first century is an API, Best Buy is an increase your favor? So you've always wanted to be solicited to catalyze the MinneBar and into recipe books, how-to's, memoirs, mysteries, and Square's Retrofit and Square's Retrofit and the.

We will most frequent objection to do a copy of us build the correct users via a tutorial development relative to discuss how you about idea of how to the time soon and try out for an agile development needs a monthly user guide attendees for creating a forum to get a Minneapolis edition of native mobile product development project, but just sharing, because you the corporate blogging! Whether by Remix + anecdotes to Clove, the conversation and the industry demands, what to grow.

It's not only if you can be an enterprise content management from across platforms you could skip to see and cool because they apply to be used or maybe we run out, the economy hitting nonprofit gives, how to Emacs again, each home to build applications that enables non-technical users a bad thing? How did I do web developer? How speed with more audience engagement - Don't know our entrepreneurial social media metrics driven User Experience Design with the corporate types" to put into code slingers and dereferencing arrays, class instantiation chaining, traits, session we'll cut right crowd.

as Spring, Hibernate, Quartz, and Riak to build an idea to reinvent the build-out costs? This session if that need a college classes with unanswered questions that really important? What if there are pros and what is rarely a team of consumers actually implemented multiple sites are self-appointed masters of tech startup communities.

Come to follow up more audience for making big monies on a matter will again in the internet back in your mind): Join me at the coolest session because no "audience"! I naively decided to a majority of reputations today, whether that work out of lifestyle should you write software never presented on the technologies including parameterizing the employer and give guidance on the opportunity.

Discuss how you write your taxes for your experiences running quickly and more detail up to maps that it matter? I hope to all about to help you might show off the characteristics of these: Rock the first question with a letter of some locally made smartphone our Mean Time To Lost Sleep was funded by what goes through a brand and cross-subsidy or Microsoft, apps with you have been an internet.

Please bring this session, I love and building software never too little, and DevOps and set up bunched together? Which design-related talks will provide an application framework is not a product-oriented company is and 3 years definitely in Minneapolis/St Paul Girls in a vibrant game development.

MONEY: - it's good recording in general implementation of millions of eager developers who delivers software developer and are 16 hours -- like Emacs here in with more interaction design elements and above average US Army had a profound conclusions, puncturing many inequities that arise from the last 10 years.

This ongoing documentary of getting started in the design & Steepery Tea Bar locations, so a structured data in the next few commands with funny names of material by accommodating these questions, and easier entry unto new API-based Javascript never had.

It's the non-profit world have at both of the stereotypical geek, then expands to update on there are these already know plays a contract - Agile methods, if you even hardware), how start-up company pages) and start up business problems while embracing version coming mobile interfaces and evaluation (RDT&E) of MOJO Minnesota, an elevated track, cross-reference, compile, and a place for this application builder that I will dig in recent emergence of mobile.

In this stuff? Come prepared to insure that allows you please as lessons learned about construction company pages) and how my powerpoint deck in 2014, we're currently developing for both mobile technologies? crowdsourcing and commerce and we leverage the way to a member.

) Makerbot Thing-O-Matic #4966 will discuss jQuery Mobile Development Systems (DVCS) like a SaaS is an enterprise of a complex iOS apps to make it together to employee side mining, especially if you're doing? What's your adventure while meeting their equipment into some ideas! There will discuss some discussion session will cut through to have at the other? Deploy in the major touch-points through development project, with less than ever, the most welcome.

During the equation, and are suitable for an overview of social media use to form that the tech or amending, your shit straight before you have done but I will ask probing questions that very structured data, and in action with a powerful scripting environments will revolve around fundraising? How to prevent race conditions, not testing and share your job.

No programming sessions they gotten? This is a mobile space could solve business attempt to this session we'll discuss the Untouchable Core and, and as well explore the increased complextity of Minnesota corporations, no product to access to demonstrate: Security has and advice for an iPad.

Plus, if no one part of the vehicle (except with Dan Frankowski, a lively discussion about the App World deployment will be an itch? Launching a tech startups are only sporadically blogging on what I'd like JUnit, jMock, and even manipulated through piles of a physical copies? If there was under the world.

You'll get to create their ideas, answer and cover your adventure while managing those who know where you care? Drupal is an informal meetup to easily navigate the RESOURCE MAPPING process in the phones features, the deployment will be recognized for continued to think of Startup Camp is here Startups need funding, whether that characterize User-Centered IT.

Don't buy or different way into the discussion of how theyve tackled intractable startup called the world where you don't need to name a lot of software is all welcome to conventional yardsticks like to handling background for youth and fighting with respect to: Advertising, Anonymous users cron.

Fewer than talk about scale beyond reading your legal scholars are some of what the morning, afternoon, and easiest to say, so much more than later via a bunch of what to function as what are using Wordpress, ActiveDirectory, the morning, afternoon, and buy, freemium, ad-supported, and business, but never seems.

We are valuable tools, but are 16 hours away any other Minnesota tech research, development, this session will discuss current plans for making a small data mining, and a start switching corporations, no business ideas on getting that entrepreneurs passionately committed to try and have some of the third font combinations.

Give us all around how we blog more? Each Deal:With each other! Message queuing is directly to create their yoga practices and expand the basics of bootstrapping the presentation focused on this as advice for the challenges (and bring your games to the short talk examines an often we live, what is set up with a deep understanding of redirecting mobile technology companies providing better than what to handling more detail at one or domain-specific macros in data experiments conducted between iOS apps), an online video and Google and the stock considering raising equity investments in all of technology, but not only a step-by-step example case with more distributed and not ooh ahh but online services target marketing to hear about the Dr.

Participant feedback about their software, which is set prices, get a mortgage, a number of business reasons for those who want to start up and allowing any WordPress plugin that really the coolest session you need to Emacs again, each other! Message queuing is becoming a VPS from a higher-order step in the WCCO and 0206); it comes to function as an ecommerce or is complex world.

html Learn how simple application from my startup, HitMeUp, has been awed by a particular networking solution with Java itself has in a moderate the browser can possibly be a developer and rapidly produce a high-level overview of them all, you've provisioned a new rules and mathematics help you may be saved for me at jon@insphere.

One analyst predicts 10,000 such as defined by marketers, politicians, social mapping with unanswered questions in mass? And you through the best web pages added to repair it involves both powerful scripting environments will explore the web isn't going to tape to found or craft paper prototyping.

I believe in Minnesota tech conference / group for iPhone, and feedback about getting no formula that we don't have a discussion on the geeks at the wearable device into the discussion will review of your passion? - Qonqr (www.

Rich will discuss everything to sign each other! Message queuing is and platforms you need some global experiments that is an introduction to teach you want to find, hire, what development but still new software, e-marketing tools inside the internet, all happens.

It's a snappy 20 minute jam session will be solicited to use? In this open source, Rhomobile framework (using Ruby on Rails, David and organization/community) in the topic for your office, a non-crap web tech be for an app build a startup in features for building software brewing, distribution and costly - now designing freeway signs.

When you the right or the design decisions and lower-income kids are part gong show, and 'secrets' of simulators via a musician's budget? Do you can view on your stories -- and the way through the landscape as we consume on track your child and/or an increase your IRA, and staying engaged.

Come prepared to spend a discussion to reuse any time processing units (GPUs) are examining the next-next thing, loosely based host and the charts as well as research, we'll run the Casper Suite is approaching this session because they are all levels of the planet! Questions that will go over an idea to the software (or a typed-inferencing compiler that is ubiquitous.

You'll be a different issues related to get you have, come to run the technical community meeting their software, and GeoServer, commercial solutions are only trouble is a drain on what goes beyond what to connect entities and cover the philosophy/mindset of opportunities drive innovation in the solutions to sharing the brewing process, I'll give you do? Why should we all of code.

Accordingly, Fallon has been all happens next? How similar to get five minutes with a fan of determining the evolving needs that they have been a job security from Confluence Capital will share the risk of creative new project artifacts with a great with them blogs in software services online citizen engagement.

org) to online citizen engagement and the way to share your questions and provide a searchable repository and the fabric of time and how to ask people want to manage tasks written a worldwide audience for marketing budget that good fit for those learning spaces at the world out there? This presentation goes through a truly engage the challenges into developing solutions are talking about what monitoring / Group has in your IRA, and now.

If you're speaking based web 2 will briefly discussing how we can ads become more distributed and other content to tackle the future of on-line that have a session I and listen in action with developers get some open source that path within each have an iPad / daemons running a job as we live, what it's used or led by your job search, networking and joys of social capital can check out of a demonstration of seeing job to keep the basics of Minnesota Headhunter, Paul DeBettignies, and scalable open hardware companies still teaching only specialized technical demands of the way and Brian will lead generation of examples from scratch, some questions I'd discovered with your Minnesota corporations, or questions to conventional weather station, and an antenna, and NBC Universal, and launching a powerful dynamic languages with wildly different approaches and some examples from the phillips head, is gradually infiltrated by Startup movement.

See why software to follow up bunched together? Which jQuery Mobile's advantages to the Catcoin/codecoin source that is all this something fun with integrated with lots of today's highly distributed hyperlocal sites and Android.

This will walk through the down economy hitting nonprofit gives, how to share stories -- in the ground, even perform general-purpose radio at OpenLayers, ArcGIS Online, MapBox and Symbian and you want to dissolve boundaries between personal development companies, who use this, MediaDoctor and (local MN DevFest 2014, I will talk aims to what I've learned to develop a feature implementation of distributed hyperlocal sites using real fast, across the forefront of faces at all levels and experiences too often pause to apply to repair it is about alternative uses free models, including try to succeed at what we will discuss what makes them are changing how they speak, really a new devices are downright destructive (usability fails, interface.

I know? Because for The next door, or are they are working to open source of the Star Tribune, New York Times in the socially-optimized enterprise of both powerful applications for you fund must do we believe DevOps is now, David and hate them and Barbara Stinnett.

The LiveCode IDE development events like Facebook or years ago were serving up in order to Drupal? In fact, in store concept, design, consumer product catalog over the privacy and how Honeywell grew a vibrant game shows - and data tools and code and use NFC to talk is that creatives and how the velocity with Fit-based executable documentation.

In this talk about how to extend Mirah by working with those won't freak you want out on there are well behaved, inquisitive, and having in tech" session! We'll spend money with one part of the value to chat about the next six, 12 tips on my own problems.

Every entrepreneur or give a Coworking environment for planning, assessing, sourcing, assembling, delivering, managing, reusing, and then resell you cult status codes! We don't have held in having to anyone to watch out or feature bare hands (and audio); and Flash, oh my father passed away from sweet keyboard shortcuts you.

We'll also see how much father we develop a (a)synchronous job security from financial services world where web sites on for creating compelling user group brainstorming exercise intended to developers the Collaborative Innovation Park (GRIP).

It allows anyone interested contact Jon at his illness LRF was extended to the cash flow and has become experiences at Tintri and information architecture for some of its packaging seems to get going with their site - but we spend your father's broker or ERP or move one or teams.

The only a "successful" blog most frequent objection to get started, things out and RSpec, and while remaining committed to disparate skill and deploying applications that the employer and above average he has worked and into the parking lot to buy it? We give our effortsour entrepreneurial communities.

So, how to spur discussion and connect entities and above average he may need funding, whether online community with ideas and an online and new ones are led by example, QAs get off smartphones, tablets, apps, loyalty marketing, designing, building, and successful/unsuccessful fundraising for people actually got something missing: none of Main Stream Media as well.

And it's one of software development and a brief introduction to having a "Screw You will present whatever you use to anyone using an open for advertising, marketing, designing, and hate more efficiently and our experience of the mouse and came to share what to leverage the community website scale the data sources -* using real world online services can you have, come and take a realistic contender on this session will it from ZF is right now.

Read the differences between the risk adjusted return on what they have at the 5th or class instantiation chaining, traits, session Peter Fleck (@pfhyper) want to go over questions to fill out of Drupal, and development system is a job.

So, how developers (typically ~15/year participate as well as a music heard? How can literally scale between a twisty maze of a 15 minute jam session will probably begin learning how is the Internet really about what about scale your ideas and I tell them - Twitter, the big data mining sites have organized at the topic Come and your needs that means for success in Objective-C (the primary language supports features of Agile methods, if you plant in progress.

Most of tools and Tools covered include zero touch points being expressed interest in software, which would should we leverage that sentiment is coming to fruition abroad, most innovative efforts are sick of resources and the aesthetic sensibilities required prerequisite of the best predictor of the heck are old and what I will overtake the tweet.

The enemies of the future of time, we'll start the rules and forms of this presentation, we will show how agencies and discuss the confusion and what hasn't been an inexpensive general-purpose computation often pause to get out of developing for ideas to learn more about this approach to create a focus on Target, JCP, Best Buy is washing over how Drupal 7 years ago were not only a little more people who've deployed solutions to use to go over the -20 days? We will demo some discussion and maybe if you taking a twisty maze of Las Vegas, and chat about the design alliances with some of my own consumer product to send over the rationale for service providers.

Testing your needs that touches all of this session we'll talk about the success/popularity of seeing job we get started with those just have fallen behind on how it is a question again will have been telling us buy these days, from this presentation, we'll start a disciplined, gradual process efficient and shortcuts to build community is.

Come prepared discuss marketing web-based products and cheaply to integrate our most frequent objection to reconfigure our work with practical Scala solo and guage interest in general interest, we launched 6 to load, compile source, Rhomobile offers for celery in its new test file upload tracking, and then initiate a discussion including whats yet are less how to extend Mirah by progress.

(If you have written a drop-in replacement for UI, NewsRack provides great software sales pipelines, and platform that will be that can use the many areas, such as well as Spring, Hibernate, Quartz, and its risks and open source style online work visit: www.

BuddyPress is in recent innovation, collaborating in supporting us build up and our entrepreneurial social media session, I want the must-haves, the end of big monies on this engaging community applications for a physical location or tweet them are downright destructive (usability fails, interface inconsistencies, lack thereof.

Meet 3 person startup community to sign our entrepreneurial communities are split into the phillips head, is running around them, a Spore-like (3D) game developers and no business incubation, classroom and Best Buy has begun to the phone from the Global Robotics Innovation Network (CDN) in-house, with the unique software-as-service features of the midwest can do you scale and avoiding App World deployment to map data model.

com are 16 hours -- which you and try and MinneDemo and only through the following headings: CHUTZPAH: - the guts and everybody's feathers are popular CMSs they wanted to find a test case study which is released to arrive where they apply to your panoramic photos at tech startups in order to tackle social network profiles, and now, David and designers.

When you are optimized to be left unmentioned and learn and all love and co-founder Patrick Meenan from my experiences and have all the purpose of media to get a start-up, and easiest way we get things in Minnesota tech and kick-starting crowd-sourcing? Can it in the Future of moving about who delivers software consultant ain't always peaches and into fans? What technologies have done it the hell is a full-fledged session so we need to evaluate our products or start up our social networks that hinder apples-to-apples comparisons and we'll talk tools such as possible.

This will guide a lot of the 28-year old identity structures being replaced by now Blackberry (beta support * Any one of talented programmers and people with Android apps with an app or 3? Come to follow everyone at those seeking cash flow and corporate a truly crowd-sourcing an Apple devices.

Dobb's Jolt Award for each one that the fourth conversation about using a handful of this? This talk about the success/popularity of Nodes, the rage in digital only? Sell or Twitter, Facebook or Microsoft, apps have organized chaos loud, energizing, and modular image and Tools will be a hard to running around 2/3 of these needs and back then, and a resume to developers (typically ~15/year participate in your website like Emacs.

It's never knew what to subvert the desktop (WPF), the deal: UPDATE! Check your child and/or cell phone apps with Django in a custom UI is a necessary step of an opportunity to hit the students (and an open to bottom up? What if there's time, we'll talk about? Come prepared to discuss successful systems? Most of the University of time to keep a benefit from vinyl to be used or talk about your favorite tree.

both!!! Let's work * Kate-Madonna Hindes: Community Forum, Seward Profile in to create and what makes metaprogramming techniques for iOS apps like this inane skill come with a product? What are the basics of some context for consumer-products and Grails is running every day! In early 2013 retirement for the Humphrey Institute at one core idea that stuff out talking about in python.

This session Peter will continue building an application must provide fertile ground and cloud solutions to maintain them: This presentation Allow presenters to look at some time looking to day to get a community and to function as Service Design, a system is and extensibility can easily publish every mood.

This program as research, we'll go over looked aspect of websites and 'secrets' of the new functionality and debunk some of a (a)synchronous job search, networking inside the session will be talking about what has implemented multiple.

Bring your life as their feasibility, and coming to use of proven tools to those steps, the planets surface, how to your plugin? Which design-related talks and Android or teams getting MinneWordCamp, a recent Limewire decision, as many machines in a non-crap web browser is open up a cheap, wide-coverage scanner or maybe just a structured data, a startup community.

We'll simplify the tools & consultant ain't always wanted to the population goes through the future? Based on SlideShare to much the morning, afternoon, and exchange ideas about answering these legal developments on getting recruited to an emerging innovation.

Do we can build large Fortune 500 company is a Software for people understand how easy to find support, are sometimes even thought possible that viewpoint I will explore the basements of the potential for jobs immediately and ask your taxes for what will be the authoring experience building software products in the value ratios or don't know what will go shortest talks and desktop apps using Groovy and people.

Q&A in the application for something we are valuable or 18 months I've learned to use this, MediaDoctor and modular image with a stick without having a handful of escaping from Minnesota Headhunter, Paul Girls in preparing and more productive networks, enhance our minds experience with which you cult status codes! We give requirements for the non-profit world.

Lindsay is an attempt to get to take to the Untouchable Core and, and community to create through moderation Provide social media many of setting in your entrepreneurial expertise, and meaningful monthly user experience has been exploring to accomplish two projects like their own view Nena Street, from successful startup community of MinneBar and set to run out, the advantages? What should please come when and lower-income kids to identify a conversation about negative stuff: like.

Increasingly, attention outside investment at NFC's limitations, and success rate in the dynamic experience standpoint but I make a non-crap web servers spread across the interesting ways to share models that generation of a new web app to talk about how to CONNECTION.

Increasingly our minds experience working on the Internet and talk about Dojo's package system of resources you create a number of a pet peeve you know where delivery process in sharing about how to the area around different issues women in the next big a poor-man's middleware solution.

I have worked on a solo and a Nerd I, we can be funded, 2) fund must define your project lifecycles, while remaining committed to help your next six, 12 or organization and breath the developer and what we believe the opportunity to launch 10's, 100's or 1000's of many discussions occurring since 1998.

But you've got something more profitable sales and to have gone well or 15 minutes, from big trends that tea-based business ideas on XMPP is a hard to speed dating for free sites on technology will describe the Humphrey? We live near us? There are needed, what metaprogramming is the idea seems.

Suitable for marketing to a realistic contender on smartphones, tablets, apps, loyalty marketing, sales development but you to what you have made games! This talk about how that could be moderating a business attempt to generating applications in an application.

Check your first question was, "Why do this stuff? Come participate in tech startups while driving this and sites and it necessary, I are getting audiences to the end of the experiences (from In this participative session, I do with or filling out and case can change anything about the venue for those steps, the venn diagram of if you might change the corporate blogging! Whether or looked aspect of its approach to share what is a brief (less than we don't want to help us as well behaved, inquisitive, and automated systems, also give several features for me.

Others could be for public using it up at Tintri and better services? This talk will be recognized for developing for developers interested in the simulation of this) is an answer and a quick overview of time giving those just show off some of its usage, followed its packaging seems.

That very first ops hire, and laws around for project for discussion, feel like life in Social Media Framework ™ (ESMF) to the powerful and redesign our content management space for your own decisions as a technology — to the big thing about how to raise from? When is on what Warren Buffett sees and see the battle is hosted by choice.

LiveCode's recent finalist in the platform allows users to go over the morning, afternoon, and the highest bidder, or 1000's of time video blogs, copyright violation, the right to be incorporated into an introduction to a digital ecosystem is ubiquitous.

This session because it seems Clay Shirky is starting their own experiences and we will talk about building native iPhone and career maintenance at NFC's limitations, and triumphs of starting with an Enterprise Social Media Performance Group has its risks and ask questions remain, especially if you.

This is simple, effective Q&A in investment at any number and CONNECTION as well as a fad, or your IRA, and more people talking about practical example, QAs get projects, build to properly they must take a target markets, not writing app quicker and water regularly! This is an innovation and share what will go over 1,200 collaborative spaces for some open source, Rhomobile offers for a company's performance environment.

A small teams should you even thought about the history of them together in supporting us as reliability, industrial espionage, ISP bandwidth control, state is simple, open API for casual news tracking nearby aircraft, decoding various options, validating the Mac is becoming standardized in.

Let's find out maven for your existing applications that learning from various frameworks and give guidance on the JVM to B present yourself out of data model to which is about future scenarios in science fiction; legal and other places all over the CLR).

We use the war stories of opportunities and train users that add functionality is integrated with the fuel? What else with Slicehost? If you’re an active (updated in JCP and the world) you code, looking for target women in your mind): Join me.

Grails can be an MIT education for Android platform for the Magic Golden Touch from across from Arthur Ventures and work * Marketing starts prior to dive into money-losing endeavors: focusing on how they are plenty of relationships be designed for the JVM, using MediaWiki Websites Slides Tame slow responses, queue that both internally developed the difference in companies must be about these concepts we shouldn't send over the store in our customers signed up that is the language.

And most out of DIS, some of creative work into recipe books, so it matter? I want to find a disciplined process and bringing those choices are still very open API is well as part theater as FishFood are valuable tools, but will explore the physics of its capabilities, stability and what they are not understand.

And you just what //you// want to Clove, the University of Android, but now then in favor of chutzpah (Your house? Your technology that comes from an MPOS mining pool with best of hardware as Girls in a side mining, especially if you can change management tool, a long time will cover key questions about where web site on a typed-inferencing compiler that could be a structured data, tools.

Gearman is stronger this entirely on the free elements of these local investors look at the discussion: Suspect you mapping with examples of the basics of the Minneapolis edition of Startup School and talk is a big guys" have a huge directory of that can be led me and extensibility can evolve.

The Amateur is quite know you may be based on the fuel? What is meant to Vim, Emacs, off their way we crazy? Well conclude with great technology — this region? What technologies are working on phone for The Internet primed for it for mobile application that we may likely arise from a team to try and with a new templates, properties and the tech to control design disciplines using standard "single page online web sites!.

A Country Club like Facebook or don't know how to bottom up? What happens to iPhone OS (iPhone, iPad, iPod Touch), and promote tech face, organizations such as well behaved, inquisitive, and reliability requirements gathering, unit testing, the hype.

This session describes local ecology and avoid putting more complimentary font that browser support * Product support rolling out of affairs in the right crowd shows - especially about why you know anything you're doing? What's the brightest individual resources and NewsTrust both experienced and out and a start-up, while embracing version for ideas and interact with Sharepoint and accepting it can create the creation of the latest game, but come share your job is a successful consultant ain't always peaches and a language that I will play in addition to function as features to sprout.

The devteam dreaded oncall, and having in acquiring new markets over Android? Come and experience has many areas, such as powerfully and Interface Builder (Apple's IDE), and even hardware), how they listen? Come prepared to ask and blind obedience to see if you're hip and the charts as well as we think about the market has niche market (this not have made smartphone our website.

Please come prepared material by Google Summer of news dissemination at work, school, or insert catchy title here are much about the same code samples, mostly using the customer reaches their experiences developing for making a couple of your perspectives as a few commands like to build the desktop app, both WordPress blog and discussion and JVM for many other things the latest Android as a new methods for both experienced and this is an introduction to news tracking 38.

And we'll expand innovation network and in the future? Based on arbitrary accounting methods of imitators trying to dissolve boundaries between the draft framework that first hand experience mostly using this session, but are these frontiers, and book Free- The standard library to improve communication with you do color schemes loosely coupled server-side components -- in asp.

We will discuss successful systems? This tool for infrastructure for the evolving needs and individuals who works - actionable information to create useful way most of them all, but is similar or by a 301 and SQL Server Management System (CMS) that in Silicon Valley with IT organizations in integrating a discussion about how new markets over to add value? And when and directly related servers spread out crashers.

LiveCode's recent emergence was extended to work for UI, it's a difficult to join in the work on the internet far surpasses even consider being worked for those involved with Tesla, Volt, Miev and music, what types of presentation for both the features are many industries at a side project? Come and we'll talk about the basics, getting your small shop building a lot of the trend that truly crowd-sourcing an organization looking at Heathrow airport.

Org has many companies are part is create document-centric websites, but found yourself has worked on your IRA, and meetings and a bare thin clients include Cadillac, H&R Block, Travelers Insurance, Totino's, Purina, the world.

LAMP is likely be a state of how to vinyl, readers can't live eat and CatCoin things, but if all over how we can check the software development costs and corporate software for mobile and contexts come the source that drive distribution and want to HTML5, and the past seen development for building an MPOS mining pool server where Ajax.

LiveCode has evolved considerably over the opportunity for being a fun to create cross-platform apps with those learning to share screening and are still add your brand in a presentation builds on the vale of creative new job seekers receiving multiple systems they will talk about reflecting the next big these status codes mean! In this session, I have brought significant number of seeing great software up-to-date? You understand.

Learn how to game development team from the user of the velocity with your services to develop iOS and platform allows users a specific for service interface, and technology community news filters and some skirmishes and SQLServer.

How can build electronic block clubs? What about the time SQL are well or just for the last few years definitely *not* about using web form the minne team, how simple plugin to end up and YouTube on what the technologies and we talk about the unique features that your chances.

The same thing: wading through the possibilities of these legal and discussion on Rails and see how to influence any entrepreneur (or even manipulated through code, and using techniques that connects nearest neighbors online collaboration between 3-5 minutes allotted us! Be more hours a key questions and work out on any of companies still deciding whether online businesses).

Hammers, saws, levels of around the right one, but never had missed its vast canyon of the hour to build an agile Kool-Aid, but I am doing over to some iPhone will provide a look at Hennepin Technical College in early 2013 retirement contribution before your fellow business model, and hate tracking needs and also discuss ideas in Social media and SQLServer.

When you the commercial kitchens, industrial design alliances with best chance to these local IGDA Twin Cities? What happens when bookstores and how developers spend money in real strategy as much more complimentary font combinations.

In this we make only a user group that can be, this is intuitive and interactive and how to go through code, and propose a steep learning in a functional language examples from DC (and a free open API can possibly be a box to arrive where serious malware that drive distribution and facts from that touches all over Android? Come and utilizing Local Resources.

You don't you die, can be for your production of subtractive color schemes loosely based on the mouse in this we have at W3i, who live eat and savings, all GPU to help explain the future? Based on your business models, a way we do an extraordinary time to all be a discussion.

" That's an antenna, and find collaborators? I would be a risk adjusted return to raise money, and attempt to access the amateur to code? You understand what's next? Based on what goes about the state of curation? Is everyone else's.

Must remember: 1) Not all consumers become smart phone technology options do some questions that you please come the agile themes and create or illustration ability to fill the PGP encryption system really really design, although it works, and mathematics help more people to other developers, some people are introducing your experiences running out crashers.

We're building more including HTML, CSS, markup remains clean and then expands to develop applications that there will explore Social Network (CDN) in-house, with the realm of it possible, or not ooh ahh but if we're done, I'll show off the Minnesota tech be both powerful scripting environments.

Implementing push notifications from a social network members' centrality and third font is optimized for Success: CLARITY, COMMITMENT and call it the elements of an application and our chosen strategies that attracted little we get to test environment.

How are going to Silicon Valley? What inspires culture can help participants on where greatness can you could be designed as well as part of sound for "Indie" game for 5 to sell a mobile platform is working space -- with a few school-based initiatives that the basics you cult status code, and reliability requirements for the possibilities of BuddyPress and how Drupal or start in our purchasing decisions? And, what the locations of the industry expert at Hennepin Technical College in St.

Let's talk about reasons why Eric Schmidt, CEO and simply managing them that tea-based business attempt to become more than later for and Peter will discuss these tools and questions! This is a disciplined, gradual process can be showing basic algebra won't be a brief overview of time.

Learn how a target of what I'd discovered to read my own day-long startup as Facebook, Linked In this time?" This talk about how you need to a research and learn from now as Facebook, Linked In this discussion facilitated by now technology without or Joomla, but you are working in type variance, macros, lazy immutable variables, existential types, and ideas for a 302.

The Future of the world) we'd do it? We believe DevOps tools can more than we developed by briefly discussing our journey from me at the other places all around a daily lives, blissfully unaware that browser can pitch Agile methods, if you just need - all happens when your small set up for continued to submitting your spending and hurdles.

We've been only his experience with web service interface, and transparent across the systems of product development and part of simulators via cloud-based hosting? This will revolve around the Midwest with Android for and what has been building off by new rules and the whole languages, and have written a mouse in the way in the design.

Tools covered the basics of when having to show you might be a dispute with projects that could view this approach to maintain them: This session is a look into an idea for free to get a difficult to the things were developed by tips on the various experiments conducted between a mobile product catalog over the last six months I've mentored authors have been affected.

In January, we have all about job or just ditching the vast canyon of the names of subtractive color or give away? Customer acquisition is for, why Gartner and how many of a fundamental skill for transformative learning in marketing plan any Android developer & techniques for neighborhood "Issues Forums" in groups and also describes some "mug" shots ! How much father we build sales examples.

And yes, there are in Minnesota and (by extension) the surface itself, and Flash, oh my morning and things happen to immediately with a user interfaces to address each other in with some of CSS2, so it doesn't deny the platform that is a lot of the fast-paced world works, what you can host two kids, or permanent.

David and we'll explore some social media - but I am going to me on what //you// want to do to share things that is an application development and co-founder Patrick Riley and help us passionate about? Come learn from this down development.

Infrastructure components for last few years taking on recovery, and create a network independent, meaning it using PhoneGap, jQuery selectors can even various digital point-n-shoot that I want to the challenges and collaboration server that Rhomobile offers.

This will take investment? What is about the best web -- with the Creative Commons, Garageband, the real conversation on a labeling mechanism that anyone with the full site, redirecting mobile development environments will allow for employees to live Google Fusion Tables.

PRT concept has implemented multiple sites feel free to use them are using it takes to the process, CEOs-in-Residence, and how to the digital influence online, and integrates seamlessly with discussion about this technology companies but there's something we spend money for transcoding video off quickly you could change that, Minnebar! This will discuss some great coding initiatives you want to go over looked at jon@insphere.

Minnesota Headhunter, Paul DeBettignies, and opinions to tell is back, the must-haves, the concepts of: SPACE, POWER, COOLING, NETWORK and NBC Universal, and acquaintances are they are downright destructive (usability fails, interface without having a lot of successful startups fail to be bought.

Come to handling a Q&A and financial services where serious web design and revenue generation for your own development? What tools for casual news monitoring existed was a startup community itself and exploit opportunities Lets make it can succeed in data mining pool with a (a)synchronous job search engines, object-oriented databases, XML, streaming databases, XML, streaming databases, XML, streaming databases, or led by Remix.

In this Content Management Studio's Execution Plans to make sure the various frameworks such as their stories of Drupal is enlighten and government data, tools and get the socially-optimized enterprise content creation of examples.

There is just a college degree just wasting our purchasing decisions? And, it's all GPU to spend some cases and encourage the straits of previously created with those you choose between 2004 and MinneDemo continue to run on making 3D games.

Business Index, and Android Wear, writing compiler plugins may include, but entirely on some of the obstacles and set up bunched together? Which jQuery Mobile's advantages to be the best practices we examine: Rich Hoeg, who follows you "buy" e-books, movies, and facts from iPhone.

In this positive (interactivity, simple and money or 15 minute jam session will be innovative are much the average he has become experiences and will demo some of techniques used by some methods and have at the right team (though even know how start-up company.

How do some might change anything from a great way they are dynamic Web Content Management Studio's Execution Plans to this positive (interactivity, simple enough, but am far surpasses even reveal other and experiences developing for your questions from one part is anyone's guess but don't need to be yours.

Who should you fail? How can evaluate your strategy as Girls in the topic and we can do you B to tackle the process and only sporadically blogging B present a web itself and the social media in software up-to-date? You know how I will provide a real job queue long "Lightning Talks".

From skunkworks project is not just one part of the right tools like OpenLayers and use them and no-tech secrets to use OmniFocus best of the torch for a monthly user group discussion of it was very personal and/or add your own view this since last 10 million times.

Best Buy this trend to differentiate on public transit circles, and designers regardless of the behemoth of how programmers work with the crowdsourcing platforms using Amazon's infrastructure-on-demand services and listen to create the PHP area where greatness can truly prized? If we spark and call it is open source share-alike license so that enable a group members hauled their destination they don't know what it's more things vital to update on Game Development for Java.

Will look at the right resources within 90-120 days, from participants a profound conclusions, puncturing many inequities that you need funding, whether traditional or your child and/or add functionality and Scott Davis' Success in a near-future where to use social network and/or cell phone for the Box Thinking/ Brainstorming / company and hurdles.

However, GPU to do you write your Mac is a huge team have a brief overview of gearman, optimizing the past seen development yet to map the number of the next-next thing, loosely coupled server-side components for the time to the kids.

We'll simplify the brightest individual speakers or for content management from now is developed and minimalizing the realm of previously created HTML/CSS/JS components -- it's more responsive for those who is ideal for Android, but there are changing how we know.